Unknown Speaker  0:03  
How was everybody?

Unknown Speaker  0:07  
You're eating some still and others have eaten. My name

Unknown Speaker  0:12  
is Rhonda Williams. We are about to start our

Unknown Speaker  0:15  
panel.

Unknown Speaker  0:17  
I'm the General singing father chairing American history at Vanderbilt

Unknown Speaker  0:19  
University and

Unknown Speaker  0:20  
the author of the politics of public housing and concrete demands the social black power of the 20th century. That's not me. I'll introduce our panelists in a second. But I really would like for us to start with a breathing exercise

Unknown Speaker  0:39  
because we've had a whole morning with some real heavy we

Unknown Speaker  0:45  
material,

Unknown Speaker  0:47  
some important critical dialogue, some dynamic speakers, some discussion of trauma and pain, racism and sexism.

Unknown Speaker  1:01  
We bought discussions of

Unknown Speaker  1:03  
homophobia.

Unknown Speaker  1:04  
And then we have some discussion classes where we've had some, some really deep discussions. And it's always important that we also take care of ourselves. I'm not talking about selfish self care, I'm talking about centering yourself so that we have the greatest clarity as we move

Unknown Speaker  1:21  
in the world, and our academic work and our

Unknown Speaker  1:23  
scholarly work and our activism work wherever we find ourselves in community. Because we are moving from a place of lack of clarity, we can speed things up even more than what they were when we got involved in them. So I want us to kind of model that just by doing a little breathing. And of course, we are all already breathing. Sometimes we don't know we're breathing. We don't know if you read them fast. If we breathing slow if we gasping for air, we don't know sometimes what's going on with some kind of getting in touch in that way. Gently afternoon. Don't fall asleep, someone will be two minutes will help us to settle in. And then I introduce our panelists and will,

Unknown Speaker  2:07  
they'll speak for 20 minutes,

Unknown Speaker  2:08  
a piece that some of

Unknown Speaker  2:11  
you will see me kind of give them a cue when they have about five minutes left. And I already told them, you know, I'm pretty serious with my cloud.

Unknown Speaker  2:21  
So if you see me Get up, give them those, you know, you'll you'll see me do that. And then if I get up and try to do a little disco dance, a song that it's time for them to finish. So I want y'all to be mad at me. I want them to be mad at me. But we don't have time for some questions and answers. We all in some discussion are going to get my

Unknown Speaker  2:40  
platform. So what I want you to do is I want you to sit comfortably.

Unknown Speaker  2:45  
If you choose what you stop to for a minute. I want you to feel how your breath is moving through your body.

Unknown Speaker  2:53  
I want you to feel

Unknown Speaker  2:53  
what has triggered you today or

Unknown Speaker  2:56  
if you have been triggered in a positive way or a negative way.

Unknown Speaker  3:00  
What you feel how does exercise like it's a

Unknown Speaker  3:03  
waste of time and you treat

Unknown Speaker  3:04  
it because I'm asking you to do exercise, whatever it is, it's all about getting in touch with your body and know

Unknown Speaker  3:09  
what is going on with you. So just breathe in, say I'm breathing and when you breathe in, breathe out, say I'm breathing. Now. When you breathe now to yourself, close your eyes. If you're comfortable, and you feel safe in the space, magic as open yourself up to you.

Unknown Speaker  3:28  
Which you should be steel.

Unknown Speaker  3:32  
Breathing in and breathing in, breathing out

Unknown Speaker  3:38  
and breathing

Unknown Speaker  3:39  
in

Unknown Speaker  3:41  
out

Unknown Speaker  4:21  
Breathing in my practice

Unknown Speaker  4:23  
deep

Unknown Speaker  4:26  
breathing out my breath slowly

Unknown Speaker  4:34  
deep,

Unknown Speaker  4:36  
slow

Unknown Speaker  4:57  
leaving college

Unknown Speaker  5:05  
We

Unknown Speaker  5:08  
wear

Unknown Speaker  5:10  
my attire

Unknown Speaker  5:13  
Cami aware

Unknown Speaker  5:46  
slowly

Unknown Speaker  5:56  
Okay, here we go.

Unknown Speaker  5:58  
So we are the criminals Fail.

Unknown Speaker  6:02  
Alright, and we have

Unknown Speaker  6:04  
two fantastic presenters for you today. Unfortunately Kelly and Camille could not make it. So we have with this Kanika and we have those James, let me give you their bios, and then they'll take my seat,

Unknown Speaker  6:19  
Mr. Tom Rima, and they will

Unknown Speaker  6:26  
call a ky TKYT writes and speaks on black politics, social movements and racial inequality in the United States. She is the author of from hashtag black lives matter to black liberation, which won the land and cultural Freedom Award for the specially notable book 16. She's also editor of how we free black feminism and the combination of a collective which won the lambda Literary Award

Unknown Speaker  6:51  
for LGBT q nonfiction

Unknown Speaker  6:53  
in 2018. Her third book race for profit how banks and the real estate industry undermined Black homeownership was published in the Justice power and politics series which Emma kolento can say that, you know, we have some fantastic

Unknown Speaker  7:07  
books

Unknown Speaker  7:07  
now series published in the Justice power and politics series and 2019 with the University of North Carolina Press, and it has been long list and it was long listed for a National Book Award for non fiction. Taylor's writing has appeared in The New York Times Los Angeles Times Boston review Paris or the Guardian, the nation jacobin and souls, a critical Journal of black politics, culture and society, among others, Sky TV. James Kilgore is an activist and writer based in Urbana, Illinois. He is the director of the challenging he conservation project of media justice, the CO director of first followers Reentry Program and the author of five books including understanding mass incarceration, of people guide to the key civil rights struggle of our

Unknown Speaker  8:01  
He is the proud father of two critical thinking sons I couldn't

Unknown Speaker  8:05  
get my hands

Unknown Speaker  8:11  
on and all the parents who got critical thinking until

Unknown Speaker  8:14  
you know, people no idea so we got to recognize any of the

Unknown Speaker  8:18  
two critical things on there

Unknown Speaker  8:21  
and then to have Africanist historian Theresa bonds let's start with kitty T. Then we got James and then we'll have

Unknown Speaker  8:27  
q&a. Thank you.

Unknown Speaker  8:37  
The computer.

Unknown Speaker  8:42  
Thanks, everyone, for coming. Thank you especially to the organizers for

Unknown Speaker  8:48  
inviting me to this very

Unknown Speaker  8:50  
important event and discussion.

Unknown Speaker  8:54  
In our continuing efforts to end mass incarceration in the system of K Do some punishment in the US. I'm going to talk about race criminalization and poverty, their intersection their sort of not origins. But how we understand the latest iteration of these processes rooted in the reaction to the social movements in the 1960s. In the US, criminalization has been tightly tied to the ways that poverty has been used as a proxy to talk about race. As Naomi power and Elizabeth Hinton have implored and much of the period since the Second World War, the entangled problems of race and class in the United States have been transposed into a suppose a problem of crime, the political and government in class in this country pathologize and mischaracterize expressions of social crises as criminal acts for two purposes in doing so, Those designated as criminals are seen as acting outside of the norms of society, which allows for their further marginalization as anti social, even anti or outside of society itself. And the second purpose is tightly connected to the first in pathologizing perfectly normal responses to social, political and economic inequality. The state effectively negates its responsibility to cure the social, political and economic inequality that give rise to so called crime in the first place. By dismissing these acts as anti social or outside the realm of society, the demands for the robust intervention of the state's meaningfully respond to these conditions is deeply and irrevocably undermined. But this was not always the case. The relationship between crime and poverty and race does not always mean rejecting a social welfare state. Post for liberals that deployed their Trichet to criticisms of black families as explanations for the persistence of black inequality and poverty over time. But in doing so, they also argue for a bevy of social interventions and problems to quote unquote, fix what they perceived to be wrong in the quote unquote broken black family, considered the Lord and report. This was during the longest economic boom in American history, where policymakers had convinced themselves that they had solved the problems of the business cycle and that the main problem in the United States was creating entry points and access into the economy that was replete with resources across us society. As a result

Unknown Speaker  11:43  
of this, those

Unknown Speaker  11:47  
sociologists social scientists, big state liberals, located the prime problem, primarily within African American and Puerto Rican families, and neighbors. If they can be fixed, then they also can become productive members of society. This was the essence of post for liberalism, inclusion into the dominant institutions of American society,

Unknown Speaker  12:13  
government law

Unknown Speaker  12:14  
free market capitalism, that these inclusion into these could get real meaning to black citizenship, allowing black people to benefit. 50 years of inclusion has demonstrated the falseness

Unknown Speaker  12:27  
of this premise,

Unknown Speaker  12:29  
from continuing racism in the housing market, to public schools to the job market to the unbridgeable wealth gap, even with all of the tools of citizenship available to African Americans, even with the hyper visibility of a black political class, and black and black celebrity. The conditions on the ground remain unfair, entrenched and enduring. Here we see the historical continuity and ruptures within the politics of neoliberalism. By the early 1970s, the post war economic engine ground to a halt as the US enter into a new period of economic recession. This created a political opportunity to undermine the already fragile junk Sony and welfare state through a combination of factors including the Nixon administration, skillfully tapping into white racial resentment by characterizing welfare as handouts to African Americans, in contrast in the quote unquote worth work ethic to the welfare ethic. But republicans also managed to characterize government programs themselves as a central part of the problem, most importantly, in the 1970s across the political spectrum, elected officials and political operatives continue to understand the over representation were continued to articulate the over representation of African Americans within the ranks of the poor and working class as intrinsic to black families

Unknown Speaker  13:58  
and black, black neighborhood.

Unknown Speaker  14:00  
Unlike the earlier generation of liberalism, this did not engender demands for social programs for British social spending, instead was presented as evidence by the Nixon administration initially, but government

Unknown Speaker  14:14  
intervention had created a crisis of dependency within black communities and going even further, poor black people representing naturalistically is irredeemable and disposable. The political invention of the underclass are racialized and criminalize fusion, deployed to frame black poverty in the 1970s and beyond, was intended to deepen the marginalization of poor and working class black people, and in doing so to cast them outside of the realm of political solutions or society more broadly. Not only were they beyond the help of government programs, as the persistence of poverty well into the 1970s, long after the war on poverty and the Great Society We're supposed to be perfect. But Nixon and then Reagan double down on the notion that government programs themselves

Unknown Speaker  15:06  
apart from

Unknown Speaker  15:10  
this strategy hinge on destroying the idea that black people were even capable of transcending poverty, dispossession, or social marginalization when reagan would claim in 1985 that the federal government fought a war on poverty and poverty one that was just that was just a comment that was just as much a comment on his insistence of the inevitable failure of social welfare programs, as it was on the futility of even trying to end poverty among the so called underclass. It is important to say that this fatalistic discourse of failure was necessary, precisely because the black movement had been so effective in transforming the discussion about the causes of black poverty

Unknown Speaker  15:55  
in the first place.

Unknown Speaker  15:59  
It was the Visual eruption of the black movement in the 1960s that impose a different discussion in understanding of black poverty and all of the social crises that emerged from it. Of course, black radicals have long asserted

Unknown Speaker  16:13  
black inequalities roots

Unknown Speaker  16:14  
in the unequal distribution of wealth and resources in the United States. But the eruption of a mass movement, and its many different forms and expressions impose this understanding on society at large. When the 1963 march on Washington, insistent on the relationship between Jobs and Freedom, it helped to create the language that there could be no black freedom without access to the jobs needed to motor social mobility. By the time of his death, Malcolm X had argued passionately that racism experienced by African Americans was rooted in capitalism. He argued, quote, the economic exploitation and the afro American community is the most vicious form, practice alternative People in America. In fact, it is the most vicious practice on any people on earth. No one is exploiting economically as thoroughly as you and I, because in most countries where people are exploiting, they know, you and I are in this country being exploited and sometimes we don't know it. twice as much rent is paid for rat infested Roach crawling rotten, rotten with tenements. Why should we do the hardest work for the lowest paid? Why should we pay the most money for the worst kind of food and the most money for the worst place to live? Near the end of the decade, Stokely Carmichael and Charles Hamilton's book, Black Power, introduced the concept of institutional racism to explain that racism was systemic and systematic, and essentially baked into the social, political and economic structures of the country. They concluded quote, institutional racism that keeps black people locked into lack of data swamp tenable Subject To The Daily party of exploitive slumlords, merchants, loan sharks and discriminatory real estate agents. These black power writers went on to conclude that racism was simply a manifestation of colonialism. As they write it as they wrote at the time, it was not a perfect analogy. But in describing the deep exploitation of black communities by a larger white dominated society, they gave economic and social explanations for poverty. jobless job was missing substandard housing, perhaps most salient Lee Martin Luther King provided the material dimensions of black inequality when he's squarely connected racial inequality to the capital was political economy. In a speech delivered in 1967, the year before his death, he said quote, there are 40 million people, poor people here in one day, we must ask the question Why are there 40 million poor people in America? And when you begin to ask that question, you're raising a question about the economic system about a broader distribution of wealth. When you ask the question, you begin to question the capitalistic economy. And I'm saying, I'm simply saying that more and more, we have got to begin to ask questions about the whole society, we call upon, we are called upon to help the discouraged beggars and life's marketplace, but one day we must come to see that an edifice which produces beggars means restructure, it means that questions must be raised. And you see, my friends when you deal with this, you begin to ask the question, Who owns the oil? You begin to ask the question, Who owns the iron? You begin to ask the question, why is it that people must pay water bills in a world that is two thirds water, these are the words that must be said. Frame bill built upon These ideas for talk specifically about how they affected black families and black woman. She wrote for the article, the double jeopardy double double jeopardy to be black and female in 1969. As a member of the Third World women's Alliance, she wrote, and keeping with its goal of destroying the black races will to resist its subjugation. Capitalism found it necessary to create a situation where the black man founded impossible to find meaningful, productive work. More often than not, he couldn't find it work of any kind. And the black woman likewise was manipulated by the system, economically exploited and physically assaulted. These statements were not just representative of a left talking to itself, but these ideas were born out of make sense through the rebellion and uprising of hundreds of thousands of black people through the middle 1960s from 1963 through 19.

Unknown Speaker  20:59  
68

Unknown Speaker  21:00  
more than 500,000 African Americans engage in Acts of rebellion and revolt in hundreds of cities across this country in response to systemic racism. In doing so, they forced even the federal

Unknown Speaker  21:14  
government of the

Unknown Speaker  21:16  
United States to acknowledge the role of racism in black inequality. The summary of the current current commission in 1968, a federal commission famously concluded, quote, what white Americans have never fully understood. But what the Negro can never forget is that white society is deeply implicated in the ghetto, white institutions created, white institutions maintain it, and white society condones it because beyond federal reports, even among ordinary white people, the protests and uprisings have effectively shifted

Unknown Speaker  21:51  
the country's ideas

Unknown Speaker  21:53  
about why black people were over represented in the ranks of the poor 40% of white attributed the riots to quote the way negros have been treated in the slums and the ghettos of the big cities and the failure of white society to keep its promises to negros. 39% of whites attributed the rights to quote a lack of decent housing. Harris Poll taken weeks after the Detroit and Newark uprisings in August of 1967, found that 66% of whites supported a quote, large scale federal work for room to give jobs to all of the unemployed 63% of white supported and, quote federal program to tear down ghettos in the cities. What is the point of all this? It's to explain why the attack on the anemic us welfare state in the 1970s took home a racist characterization that it did, including complaining black coffee with ideas about black criminality kill him earlier described and demonstrated Part of the power of black protest was not just in its programmatic in demands for programmatic responses to black inequality, but in ways that expose the lies at the center of American society. King wrote, quote, in these trying circumstances, the black revolution is much more than a struggle for the rights of Negroes. It is forcing America to face all of its interrelated flaws, racism, poverty, militarism, materialism, it is exposing the evils that are rooted deeply in the whole structure of our society. It reveals systemic rather than superficial flaws, and suggests that radical reconstruction of society itself is the real issue to be face. The black movement have ended all of the central mythologies and lies that hold this country together. notions of American exceptionalism unfettered the idea of unfettered social mobility and the dueling notions that hard work is that the roots of success and lack of success is the result of laziness, the black movement expose all of those lies, and as a result, it was viciously attacked the floor, real expansion of the social contract through the Great Society had been coerced by the violence of urban rebellions, not the altruistic concerns of government officials. The movement had not just inspired new programming, but he had destabilized the entire society, as the foundation for the emergence of new movements in organizing from opposition to the Vietnam War to the surge of public sector strikes and demands for higher paid. The right was appalled and the economic class mobilized to shrink and ultimately destroy the anemic American welfare state. And one part of that attack is to dismiss black protest as simple lawlessness as criminal but the more salient, protecting cluded casting African Americans is undeserving dysfunctional and irresponsible to require this required attacks that went beyond the role of government, but that they involve vicious attacks specifically on black people. When George Romney Nixon secretary of have have had to explain why housing programs under his leadership had failed to actually solve the nation's housing problems he positively were referenced in editorial written by Newsweek magazine column was a Newsweek magazine columnist that referred to urban neighborhoods as diseased in a column titled role to help this writer described social welfare is the core problem in American cities, writing unquote, well intentioned and liberal minded people have assumed that social welfare is the way to cure conditions like those in the South Bronx in other New York slumps and he

Unknown Speaker  25:58  
said this idea of claiming

Unknown Speaker  26:00  
Spending had made the city quote, worse and worse and worse, he went from criticizing social spending to attacking the recipients of social welfare. In a sentence that preceded a section titled bad people, he wrote a quote, if the disease is to be controlled, it is first necessary to jettison the notion that poor people are good, especially if they are black. Some poor, black people are evil. Because they were born that way. From much more often, their heroin addiction course has been to be evil. Conservative intellectuals gathered in think tanks and journals to articulate this process of redefining. They went further than resuscitating the culture of poverty, reaching back to early fair, earlier theories of biological racism. For example, one conservative describes urban slums, this quote, human cesspools into which are worse human problems have flow and which through some kind of bacterial actual a self sustaining reaction has been created that's making matters worse, despite the general improvement going on everywhere else. Another conservative author described urban rebellions as little more than, quote, outbreaks of animal spirit and stealing by slum dwellers. By the summer of 1977. Time magazine officially introduced the term underclass in a cover in a cover article that called it the minority within the minority, the new underclass to a broad popular audience, but by then the description was familiar, quote, hopelessness is that this is a description of the underclass, hopelessness is at home and effective ghetto flat, where children make more of a sport of chasing cockroaches or dodging rats. They may never be hot water for bathing, or working bathtub to put it in, or any other functioning plumbing. Under these conditions, afflictions such as lead poisoning, and severe influence or common sibling sleep together in the same bed separated by a thin wall or blended from parents streets around safe to walk at night. Nobody starves but many people are malnourished on a diet of hotdogs, Twinkies, Fritos soda pop. The underclass will have to do harder, will will find that harder to the underclass will find that harder to do. Getting up on its own feet given its painful heritage, encouraging incentive in the underclass and overcoming the barriers of racism could take five or 10 more years, more likely the task will take a generation or more. This kind of language these kinds of characterizations help to pave the way to disconnect and conditions of inequality and exclusion to systems of oppression and exploitation. Back to the perceived dysfunction in irresponsibility of individuals established Work that Reagan with us to eviscerate public programs that had been wealthy and closed.

Unknown Speaker  29:11  
In the absence of any significant or lasting social movement until Black Lives Matter. These became the dominant narratives explaining black poverty and laying the basis for further criminalization, the war on drugs and the content mass incarceration, in our struggles to dismantle dismantle the system of pages of punishment. We must also unravel its politics

Unknown Speaker  29:35  
that locate crime

Unknown Speaker  29:35  
in the psyche of African Americans and poor people more generally, we must continue the work of the black liberation movement that linked black inequality and dispossession, to the capitalist political economy. We must continue the work of building the social movements that attended to the crisis up today, but also the revolutionary movements. They seek to destroy a social order that relies on the subject nation of poor and working class black people Latinx and other oppressed people for the enrichment of a parasitic minority. Another World is possible, but it relies on us understanding the historical roots to the contemporary crisis we face.

Unknown Speaker  30:41  
So,

Unknown Speaker  30:43  
I'm going to ask you to turn on your indicators.

Unknown Speaker  30:44  
And we're going to kind of take a turn

Unknown Speaker  30:46  
from the kind of grand overview which is an amazing overview of the kind of history and this and

Unknown Speaker  30:55  
structural

Unknown Speaker  30:57  
elements of capitalism and racial capitalism. Behind the process of criminalization, and I'm going to, I'm going to talk about criminalization, somewhat through my own experience. And in doing that I'm contesting two kinds of narratives, one, which a lot of people brought up already today, and that is that we are somehow our end of this process of criminal justice reform, whereby it's this inexorable process whereby if we keep removing one brick from the wall each day somehow are going to end up in something that looks very different. And as someone who maybe at one time believed in the 1960s and 70s, that we were going to dismantle the military industrial complex by electing anti war politicians and having them vote power away from the military. Hmm. How did that turn out? I think we're running down the same road. If we think a policy of moderate criminal justice bipartisan reform is going to take us to a position of abolition core and to a significant Changing the way was criminal legal system operates. Right?

Unknown Speaker  32:04  
Right. Correct. Right. Yes.

Unknown Speaker  32:06  
So, secondly, I want to interrogate the notion that I have the greatest respect for people who operate in places like New York and California. I'm from California, I do my prison time in California. But there's a lot of the rest of the United States and the struggle is happening. The is happening in many places in many forms. I am in the cornfields of Urbana, Illinois. That's where I live a county of 200,000 people were the University of 51,000 is the centerpiece. But it it has. It has the fifth highest poverty rate of any county in the hundred and two and 11. So I'm going to talk a little bit about the battle that I've been involved in to fight jail building because for me, jail building a jails if there's no there's no bigger manifestations physical manifestation of the process of criminalization then building jails. When you build jails, you're criminalizing people and you're saying, we're not going to give you houses, we're not going to give you health care. We're not going to give you education. We're going to give you a cage, and then maybe we'll do some mental health inside the cage. That's so that so I'm, I'm focusing on how do we resist jail building and what is jail building look like, particularly outside the major, major metropolitan areas.

Unknown Speaker  33:28  
So I came to to

Unknown Speaker  33:31  
to Champaign Urbana in 2009, after being incarcerated in California for six and a half years in federal and state prisons. And in 2011, the share of our Sheriff came to the county board meeting with a proposal to spend $20 million on new jail cells in our county and I hope you'll excuse my, my expression of how I responded to that, my response to that when something like you like this Fuck you share falls, fuck you in your goddamn jail. You're not building a jail in this county after I spent all that time locked up in the kind of system you're trying to, you're trying to reproduce. So with that attitude,

Unknown Speaker  34:16  
I tried to get together with people and organize

Unknown Speaker  34:21  
a campaign to stop the jail building.

Unknown Speaker  34:24  
And we do what you do in a campaign. We did research. What did we find in that? In our research, we found that in our county, where black people make up 13% of the population, they made up consistently 50 to 72% of the jail population. I don't think you'd find a bigger racial disparity in jail population, anywhere in the US. I've looked hard to try to find to try to find it. Not in Mississippi, I can tell you that. So, we also found that

Unknown Speaker  34:53  
about 25% of people were in the jail with had traffic

Unknown Speaker  34:57  
violations

Unknown Speaker  34:58  
about 20 40% mental health issues. We found that in our, in our community, we had no mental health crisis center. The jail serves that purpose. We had no detox. We had no transitional housing for people coming home from prison. And the two shelters that existed for unhoused people at that time, were inadequate, and they've since been torn down. So what we did is we fought is we fought for it for alternatives to incarceration, and to reallocate the county budgets. And by 2013, we had totally defeated the sheriff's proposal. And the sheriff said, I'm not going to ask for any money for jail building for the following year. And we had a part can can we get 100 grand?

Unknown Speaker  35:45  
But wait a second, you might have guessed it, your applause was premature.

Unknown Speaker  35:50  
Three months after we had a party to celebrate stopping that jail campaign, he came back with another proposal, but this time instead of talking about public safety and fighting crime, Was he talking about the welfare of the inmates? Right? Oh, we need a better mental health facility in the jail. Oh, we need a welcoming visiting room painted in suiting colors, so the families can feel comfortable in the jail. And so we had to we had to re gear to fight against a care and share we had to read so and so what I want to point out here is that jails have now become a project of reform. How we reform the criminal legal system is we build better jails, we build more welcoming, more comforting, more soothing, more soon in jail. So we continue to fight. We've continued to fight the sheriff on this. And so far, he hasn't managed to build another jail cell yet. But in August of this year, he came back with another proposal $47 million to build the jail. Much more comforting, much more soothing, but still the jail so now we have to fight again. So Michael point in this really is that is that this urge to build jails is not just in Champaign County. And it's not just in big cities, if we look across the country we find in the 3000 counties that are that, that we have that gym, there's what the beer Institute refers to as a quiet jail building boom is happening. And in many instances, this is a side effects and After Effects of criminal justice reform, and to illustrate this, I want to visit the state of Indiana, which is ground zero for jail building. Okay. So in in 40% of the 92 counties of Indiana, they're still building projects either underway or in the planning stages. And this is largely a result of criminal justice reform at Hb 1006, which was championed by the the guy who used to be the governor there. I can't remember his name. It's sometimes see him in the background with a goofy look on his face when he was 45. give speeches. What's his name again? Yeah, pants. Yeah. Okay, that's number one. So hey champion this thing calling a criminal justice reform. And what it did is it took me two things. It is it lightened the penalties for people who were who had low level felonies. So anybody who has to be put in prison for more than two years, for less than two years, sorry, would go to a county jail. And but it also increased the penalties for people who have serious, violent, violent offenses. So the result of that was within two years, the jail population in Indiana had increased by 32%. And the state was reimbursing the counties with $35 a day to pay for the accommodation people which is about 30 or 40% of the cost of keeping those people in jail. So what better What that is this is a neoliberal economic model, right? neoliberal economic model you're talking about here reduce, you reduce spending at the top, except for military security, and presidential golfing as escapades and you, and you push it down to the state down to the local level. And then when you get to the local level, there's no money left for services, but somehow they find money for jail code. So we now have about 15 projects fully underway. And the real model for this is the city of Indianapolis, the biggest city in Indiana. Right, which anybody from Indianapolis? Yes.

Unknown Speaker  39:35  
Okay, there we go.

Unknown Speaker  39:36  
Well, Indianapolis has an overcrowded jail. Yeah. Indianapolis has just approved the expenditure of $600 million to build a 3000 bed jail. Yep. Not only that, because if you're a sheriff, you have to build if you have more people in your jail, you have to build more capacity. But the other thing is you got to get some people out of jail. So what Indianapolis has done They put people on electronic monitoring incarceration, a so called a so called reform, so called alternative to incarceration, said alternative form of incarceration, people are paying $10 a day. Indianapolis has 8000 people on electronic monitors more than any other city in the country. So this is this is the spin off. This is one of the spin offs one of the end results of criminal justice reform. And I know people have been talking about reform, talking about non reform reform and so forth. But this just tells me that we need to look very carefully at the kind of criminal justice reform we want to support. particularly problematic is criminal justice reform that separates people who have convictions for so called violent offenses and non violent offenses. Yeah, because that's a racial divide, because there's a much larger concentration of black people and people of color in general getting so called violence. convictions, but it also is a way to, to do exactly what's happening in Indiana to, to load the jails. And ultimately, in in Indiana, they increase the penalty for people with violent convictions. So instead of doing 50% of their time, they're doing 75% of the time. So in the long run, it's going to lead me that there's going to be more people in prison, because they're staying there for a longer period of time. Yeah. So I just think it's really important to look at this reform, of these, these issues of reform, and, and be suspicious of them, and make sure that we're fighting for is going to lead to some kind of systemic change. And so this, so this brings me to my conclusion where I want to talk about, you know, why do we need to look at small counties, why do we need to look at these 3000 counties? And I think, I think it's because if we're talking about a system, we're talking about a national system, if we're talking about a movement We're talking about a national movement. And we need to bridge and make connections that we haven't made. And we need to make those connections in, in a number of ways. First, we need to make them geographically across different spaces where we don't always connect. And then we need to make them across issues. Because if we're talking about a system, we're talking about a system of racial capitalism, then we're talking about issues of housing, we're talking about issues of education. We're talking about issues of food insecurity, we're talking about issues of climate change. And particularly when you're fighting in small counties, you might not mobilize people around issues of the criminal legal system reform, but they're going to be impacted by other things. They're going to be impacted by opioid crisis. They're going to be impacted by the lack of housing, they're going to be impacted by the rural side of the crisis of capitalism, and the poverty and inequality that's enhanced there. So I mean, we I think there's there's a way to build to build to build those bridges. Across issues, and it's that kind of bridge building that will lead us to a movement that that can really effectively challenge the system, rather than focus all of our energy on reforms, and I'm not against reforms. I know reforms are important, but we need to think carefully about how they fit into a more strategic picture. Lastly, how many minutes of it?

Unknown Speaker  43:23  
Okay, I'm just about. So lastly,

Unknown Speaker  43:26  
I just want to say that I'm, I mean, one of the things that happens in in these conferences is we get so overloaded with the structures of oppression that we that we almost become overwhelmed by Oh my god, it's a monster we can't possibly fighting. So I want to just make note that people are fighting this thing and people are fighting is I mean, we're fighting an army in my county, but people are fighting it across the country in places that we don't, we don't see. I mean, people in Douglas County, Kansas, for example, have been finding a jail for a while. And, and so I had a Skype session with him about three years ago, and I said to them say you're fighting a jail, you find out you fought it off. How many when you have a couple of meeting, how many people can you get out to a public meeting on the jail? No, they told me 1200. Again, 1200 people to a discussion about jail building in Douglas County, Kansas. So that tells me that, that and that's not just because it's about jail building. It's about what's the county going to do with the money? What's the county going to do with the money? Because in our county, we did door to door surveys, we wouldn't ask people, if you had $20 million to spend in this county. What would you spend it on? 7% mentioned policing our jails. Everyone else mentioned housing dimension employment. One person said he would spend it on Chucky cheese. Now, I wasn't exactly sure what that would look like, but I thought it would probably like it better than cases. So I'm just saying that you know, Enough. Enough, enough, say you in upstate New York, there's people finding jails in Provo, Colorado, there's people finding God In many, many other parts were that we don't even really have contact with in, in, in Kentucky and Georgia. There's there's jail building, and there's resistance to jails. So that's it's part of it's part of a much. It's part of a much bigger struggle. And so I hope we'll talk about building those connections today. And I hope we'll talk about what does this have to do? What does this have to do with evolution? How are we how are we framing this, so we're, so we're attacking the system. So I look forward to taking up these issues. And then as we move on to the rest of the conference, and I look forward to taking my deliberations and or and learnings back to the cornfields of Illinois and spreading the word of abolition, like fertilizer on the crops. When we

Unknown Speaker  45:57  
point out organizations that are fighting

Unknown Speaker  45:59  
against this,

Unknown Speaker  46:01  
we want to talk about

Unknown Speaker  46:04  
want to talk about the bond funds that are freeing people but are also fighting not to put them on e commerce or is not to put them on

Unknown Speaker  46:11  
the

Unknown Speaker  46:20  
so I just want to make sure we get one thing straight here. Those things they put on your way. What are their

Unknown Speaker  46:33  
ankle

Unknown Speaker  46:35  
shackles? Can we do

Unknown Speaker  46:36  
that again and hold shackles and you go. Okay, so we don't want ankle shackles we don't want and they're certainly not braces or not. So I'm just saying that the mamas bailout. And organizations like the struggle community bond fund, have done

Unknown Speaker  46:51  
have done great work getting

Unknown Speaker  46:52  
people out of jail, getting people out there fighting against cash bail, but when but they've also done a lot of education. No work around around the issues of what happens to people when we get there. Now, what happens if we if we decarceration but all we're doing is moving people into poverty into marginalization in the community, moving people into skip skip rows in Los Angeles, that's not a victory. That's not a victory. So we have to be careful that we're not there. We're not there. We're not falling into that trap. That is my conclusion.

Unknown Speaker  47:41  
Okay,

Unknown Speaker  47:42  
so I'm going to pull my card on you.

Unknown Speaker  47:45  
I was waiting to I wanted

Unknown Speaker  47:47  
to do something to contribute.

Unknown Speaker  47:50  
So

Unknown Speaker  47:54  
So where are people lining up for questions?

Unknown Speaker  48:00  
So where were we lining up?

Unknown Speaker  48:04  
Okay, in the front. So right here, right here. So if you have a question, you can begin to line up down here. I just wanted to start us off.

Unknown Speaker  48:14  
To bring some things together, they said, you know, you all probably heard the echoes and the making the unmaking of the theme of the conference. But one of the things that struck me was the ways in which both of our presenters took a look at what happens when we expand the notion of criminalization in terms of our interrogation, our understanding our history, our examination of criminalization, right, Matt exclusive of prisons and all those kind of collateral consequences and connections, link to prisons and policing and arrest. But even beyond that, like what goes into a criminalization process, what else to make it in terms of notions of economics, notions of race and the ISM so I thought that was very important. How can we begin Think about what happens if we expand our criminalization without losing the concrete realities and experience of those who have been criminalized and incarcerated in architectural places and spaces. And the other thing is that they really raised the question about what is criminal by looking at systemic racism, racial capitalism as a criminal process, right. And I heard that echo throughout all of what they said and in terms of shifting the lens to really get us to think about the replication and the visible lies in the processes of criminalization of people in places outside of both spaces, where we're trying to fight to abolish them, right. So even if we abolish those spaces, what happens if we're not dealing with criminalization and

Unknown Speaker  49:51  
breath,

Unknown Speaker  49:52  
right, that can still happen in the context of community and society and whether it's the welfare state and how people are Imagine the best part of the world first day and demonizes part of the world first, what happens when you don't deal about deal with those aspects of criminalization, Coretta Scott King when she talked about violence and violence is not just that kind of physical application of violence, but it's it's about lack of medical cares about the the lack of education is about our own willingness to fight poverty and engage and change. So how do we think about the both and all that I think is really important. I'm waiting for somebody to queue up here at the mic, because we gotta go over here. So I think we can cook call queue up right here. We have plenty of time for questions. But I thought I would put that on the table just to kind of do that bridge building between

Unknown Speaker  50:43  
our two speakers. You heard

Unknown Speaker  50:45  
them yourself and to ask them to just speak very briefly before we have our first question about how they see the connection between their two presentations because I think it's important to do bridge building not only in community and that does work, but in terms of the way we're imagining something different as we struggle.

Unknown Speaker  51:09  
I think

Unknown Speaker  51:13  
I think the main thing that I would say is that criminalization

Unknown Speaker  51:22  
is an active process. And so,

Unknown Speaker  51:27  
this is something that radiates, you know, beyond the issues that I was

Unknown Speaker  51:35  
talking about

Unknown Speaker  51:36  
crime and poverty,

Unknown Speaker  51:39  
the welfare state in particular

Unknown Speaker  51:43  
the way that the state my general, really, by the way that the state, demonizes activities and actions that ultimately does not want to take responsibility for

Unknown Speaker  51:59  
War.

Unknown Speaker  52:01  
Crime is an effective way to do that. So one of the things that I think about is the border. And the way that, you know, globalization, and also the particular role of the United States in Central and Latin America has created the conditions where

Unknown Speaker  52:23  
people

Unknown Speaker  52:24  
come to this country. And that has, you know, the border has been criminalized a crisis has been conjured for the sake of marginalizing in demonizing

Unknown Speaker  52:40  
people who come here

Unknown Speaker  52:41  
to, you know, people who come here because we've been there. And so I think that it's important to see these processes in their different manifestations. You think about the pipeline protest and the criminalization protest in there the continued efforts to intimidate activists

Unknown Speaker  53:08  
from engaging of protests by levying unreasonable fines and threats of actually doing time for participating. protest is all about creating subservience and

Unknown Speaker  53:25  
acquiescing to

Unknown Speaker  53:28  
the demands of session one, it was actually also the economic class. And so in that sense, I think that

Unknown Speaker  53:37  
the

Unknown Speaker  53:39  
process in ways that James was, you know, describing the ways that small municipalities use jail is as another site, example,

Unknown Speaker  53:56  
of this process. Important to think of this dynamically and as part of a larger political process and to map, conceptualize and think of these things in America in limited ways, because the opposition is not doing that.

Unknown Speaker  54:18  
Thank you. So I think

Unknown Speaker  54:19  
the

Unknown Speaker  54:20  
I think I'm

Unknown Speaker  54:21  
was trying in some ways to talk a little bit about a local manifestation of kind of the historical and big picture framing and camera was was presenting. But now that you've opened a few other doors, I'm going to jump in for a minute. Because I think I mean, basically, I'm talking about the sort of impact of neoliberalism and how it connects to mass incarceration. And I think it's important, as you pointed out, neoliberalism, it hits it hits Champaign Urbana, but it's a it's a global, it's a global philosophy, global phenomenon, as part of the global structure of global capitalism. So as we're trying to build out our movements and trying to figure out how to how, how does what we do connect with what's happening everywhere else in the world. Because recently, if you turn on the news, or you get wherever you get your news from wherever, whatever feed you're looking at, things are popping up all over the world, right? From from Haiti, to Lebanon to achieve a, etc, etc. London, there's things happening all all over the world. And this is largely a product of the fallout from you from neoliberalism, and the kind of political regimes that have taken power as a result of that. So that and so we see manifestations of that at the local level. We have, we have a county board member who wears a mega hat to me. So it's just so it filters it filters down to that local level. And the more we're able to see our local struggle struggles in the bigger picture, the more capacity to build a movement to find a destination Hello.

Unknown Speaker  56:10  
Good, nice pippy question. Just

Unknown Speaker  56:15  
received but really brief just bring that question about jail.

Unknown Speaker  56:20  
I have been looking for about 12 years about the role of

Unknown Speaker  56:23  
jails in rural communities. They make money on it in the south, they don't want to close them, they want to

Unknown Speaker  56:30  
fill them. And they have found a

Unknown Speaker  56:33  
real with these ice raids.

Unknown Speaker  56:36  
They're getting all sorts of money.

Unknown Speaker  56:39  
And they're telling that and articles and commentaries that that's they don't want to close them. They want to open them.

Unknown Speaker  56:48  
With the iceberg, the chicken plants our job and many of us in this room, went down in and worked on that whole thing and we get calls to go pick people Not just in heaven's County, Louisiana, the bail system continues, they have to be bailed out in order to get out from from all of that. And so I would like, I really like your

Unknown Speaker  57:12  
focus on the local,

Unknown Speaker  57:15  
because it's not just prisons and penitentiaries, and all of these massive structures, but it's

Unknown Speaker  57:20  
also a local level. And the south or at least Mississippi can't seem to get rid of the idea that you make money off of bodies. So

Unknown Speaker  57:34  
let's get another question on the floor. Think about that. Let's get one more question.

Unknown Speaker  57:40  
I'm curious, I'm thinking about this panel on the last panel as

Unknown Speaker  57:44  
well talking

Unknown Speaker  57:44  
about the importance of public education, organizing, building costume and solidarity. So with that in mind, how specifically do you think

Unknown Speaker  57:52  
what's what should be our specific strategy for combating the big dollar quote unquote, bipartisan

Unknown Speaker  57:58  
CJ reform actors are coming in,

Unknown Speaker  58:02  
and state legislators spaces in particular.

Unknown Speaker  58:03  
So how do we educate organize people? How long did you

Unknown Speaker  58:07  
feed them into that one thing?

Unknown Speaker  58:16  
So, I mean,

Unknown Speaker  58:19  
I totally agree with the comments that I can't find the

Unknown Speaker  58:21  
question, but am

Unknown Speaker  58:22  
I totally agree with the comments today that local authorities are using jails as a cash cow. And companies are benefiting from from this as well, whether it's in me most mostly they all operate jails, but they make money off of

Unknown Speaker  58:35  
the services, they make money

Unknown Speaker  58:36  
off of building it cetera, etc. And so mean, one of the things that, that and so there's now kind of a speculative model about building jails, I mean, they, there's the old if they build it, and they will come, but now there's like, what, what are the markets for, for bodies? So, for example, in the county that's next to mine, it's called pirate County. They had a debt for people and they're just jail, and they built a jail with a capacity of 76.

Unknown Speaker  59:04  
And

Unknown Speaker  59:06  
they because they were anticipating on getting overflow bodies from Cook County in Chicago and making money off of that. So this didn't work out for them too well, because the jail population and down in Cook County, but other companies are doing that. And now with the ice with the ice rays and ice detention, US Marshals are also outsourcing some of their incarceration. So there is a market for bodies, there is a market for bodies, and obviously, job builders are in tune this and there's a whole network of people that make money off is that work together. So we have these architects who are in who are in league with construction companies. And then and then we have all the whole set of providers that provide everything, you know, from food to healthcare to toilet paper in the jail. So, yeah, it's an and then and then when people get out of jail, we put them under suit under supervision. We make money off of that and we put them in debt which creates another way for them to end up back in jail because they because they owe debt for their current their post incarceration failure to meet their debt. So it's it's definitely a, you know, a financial venture as well as a politically punitive and an

Unknown Speaker  1:00:15  
expression of information, structural racism. And

Unknown Speaker  1:00:22  
in terms of the,

Unknown Speaker  1:00:25  
how do we

Unknown Speaker  1:00:28  
sort of

Unknown Speaker  1:00:30  
not have people limit their

Unknown Speaker  1:00:35  
demands

Unknown Speaker  1:00:36  
for change in the criminal justice system to what is being offered as criminal justice reform? I mean, I think that we have to one, I think,

Unknown Speaker  1:00:50  
instead of saying and we know the criminal justice reform is being pursued by some within The political class economic class, who recognize that there was righteous anger about the what they would think he would popularly characterized as the excesses of the criminal justice system, and that they should step in front of that before the demands for substantive reform, become, you know, too unwieldy or too large or too systemically damaging. And so I think that one way is to see this as an open instead of necessarily seeing it as a threat, which is to say that there is a recognition that there is a deep and pervasive problem in the criminal justice system in this country, I think is it is the discussion framed in ways that People who consider themselves to be abolitionists would like for people who want actual systemic transformative, transformational change. No. But I think that there's an opening. And there's a way in which you can take advantage of that. Or there's a way in which you can cut yourself off. So for example, it's a pet peeve of mine, and I like it good in his, but when people talk about private prisons, there's a section of our movie that needed to back up. And, you know, the immediate responses is not private prisons. It's, it's the state, it's the state that is the problem with private prisons make up this tiny percent of the prison. Yes, that is true. But that is an opening for conversation. It's not an opening to denounce people because they don't understand or have not yet come to the same conclusion about the small role. private prisons, because that's the one that's talked about all the time, because that's the one that the state in the criminal justice performers want you to focus on, and not the role of the actual state as the main in prisoners. So that I guess that is for me an example of instead of approaching this as a problem, that we should approach it as an opening and an opportunity to, you know, make arguments about what the nature of the problem is. And so the beyond the particulars of the political argument, I think, come back to issues of organization and strategy and how the movement sees itself is intervening around these questions because I think that there are lots of people who do lots of work it's not always clear what how that is organized. What its relation the different groups and organization what their relationship to each other are? Is there a kind of problematic strategy between the different groups? Or is it people, you know, everyone's just kind of doing their own thing. And so that relates to their questions about strategy and tactics within a social movement that I also think, are critical. I've written some recently about issues in the Black Lives Matter movement that revolve around questions of organization and how movements create a space within which to argue and debate about real political questions and disagreements in ways that take the movement forward in ways that develop bonds of solidarity as opposed to generating an atmosphere of action. Promoting and in dispute. And so I think that those remain questions for every social mobilization that is looking, you know, to maximize its typically meager resources to figure out how to be most effective and impactful.

Unknown Speaker  1:05:24  
Let me get a couple more questions willing to change and you jump into that mess

Unknown Speaker  1:05:27  
as I think the queue is over here. So I see I see but the keys

Unknown Speaker  1:05:32  
over here those couple, okay.

Unknown Speaker  1:05:40  
I'm curious about what your thoughts are perspective about,

Unknown Speaker  1:05:50  
about having an effective social movement, a message

Unknown Speaker  1:05:54  
in order to abolish prisons,

Unknown Speaker  1:05:57  
dismantle the system that one would ask work like today in 2013, especially given that it seems like one of the things that we've been hearing throughout this morning is it would have to be revolutionary in a sense

Unknown Speaker  1:06:12  
can depend on the institutions of the state and capital to save us. And so what would such a revolutionary look like today? How can we kind of like think about that in a more tangible sense?

Unknown Speaker  1:06:29  
Let me let me get one more question on. Thank you

Unknown Speaker  1:06:35  
so much. The question I had a year

Unknown Speaker  1:06:41  
with your

Unknown Speaker  1:06:42  
when you were tough talking about the share keeps coming back.

Unknown Speaker  1:06:47  
Is there someone a group that is there to know about to imagine committee coordinating with and thinking of like an ally

Unknown Speaker  1:06:57  
state legislation for

Unknown Speaker  1:07:02  
He keeps coming back with new ideas, right? He's

Unknown Speaker  1:07:05  
working with another group of

Unknown Speaker  1:07:07  
share. It says there's something behind him. That's

Unknown Speaker  1:07:15  
Oh, she's saying is it I kept talking and I kept personalizing it like is the sheriff. And she's asking, Is there somebody more than the sheriff that's involved? So

Unknown Speaker  1:07:25  
okay. So there's the National Association of sheriffs. There's also

Unknown Speaker  1:07:32  
the National Institute of and I see the NICU, they do workshops for sheriff's and for local government authorities, and they call it how to build the jail. And basically, educating them on how to make a jail, do jail building and make it politically acceptable to communities. So are so we had three or four people from our county when did that workshop like in 2011, and then they came back and we actually got a copy of their workshop materials and so on. We weren't supposed to get that. But anyway, so, yeah, so and but, but I think one of the things that's important to recognize is that small counties, two or three people can actually exercise incredible power in terms of what actually what actually happens. You, the Chief Judge, the sheriff, and then ship, the chief prosecutor have an immense amount of power. And the county board members typically don't know a damn thing about promote about criminal justice issues or jail building. So they just listened to the experts and the only experts they listen to

Unknown Speaker  1:08:29  
on law enforcement.

Unknown Speaker  1:08:31  
I want to just say one thing about the

Unknown Speaker  1:08:32  
social movement and do for the rest. But I just, I think, we haven't really talked about this here. Yet, but I think there's an important role for for forming incarcerated people for critical impacted people to play in a building and movements, particularly around the around issues of prison and in jails and incarceration. And I think one of the reasons that former incarcerated people place It was such a central role is because the there is because they have That intersectionality because when people come out of prison, typically, they have housing problems. They have education problems, they have employment problems, they have health problems, they have the gamut of problems. And they're open to getting involved in struggles and all those issues and becoming a bridge between people who are fighting on different on different issues. And I mean, I have the greatest respect for people who are based in the universities are critically impacted, going out and fighting these issues. But those are not, you're not directly impacted by all these issues in the same way that that those people are. So it's very important that some of those people are in in these movements and playing a leader in playing a leadership role. Obviously, with a critical lens, because not everybody is coming out of prison is an Oracle, right? We can't necessarily follow all of them. But but there's a there's a collective experience, and particularly people who are organized as you know, in their capacity to be formally cursory people tend to be a little more a little bit more reflective about what they're doing and why

Unknown Speaker  1:10:02  
Yeah, I

Unknown Speaker  1:10:04  
think that's a that's a really important point. I

Unknown Speaker  1:10:10  
moved to Chicago in 1998. I've left I've been living in New York and I left New York to move to Chicago, too

Unknown Speaker  1:10:25  
many reasons, but one of them was that a group of death row prisoners in

Unknown Speaker  1:10:33  
Illinois, had began to organize themselves. They were called the death row 10 victims of john birch, torture and me and my partner at the time moved to Chicago to be involved in a campaign to, you know, expose the way the death penalty function in Illinois but also to be a part of the movement of People who were imprisoned on death row two to two in that sense of capital punishment in the central part of our organizing involves the family members of the incarcerated but also the incarcerated themselves who, you know, hit

Unknown Speaker  1:11:24  
my credit destroyed by the the earlier session where the brother called in from Pennsylvania State President the

Unknown Speaker  1:11:38  
fees from the prison phone calls and you know, the the organizing the effort that goes into

Unknown Speaker  1:11:47  
that level of organizing with it is critical to involve those who, you know, not they don't it's not just that they have a stake is that they have incredible insight in organizing skills and That they contribute to the movement itself. So I think any kind of social movement dealing with these issues, has to, you know, has to incorporate that into it. I think the second thing you asked about do these movements need to be revolutionary. And, you know, I think that most mass movements start out as reform movements because they're trying to change in aspect of the, of the system as it currently exists. It's, you know, typically over time engagement with the forces of the state that begin to radicalize certain sections of the movement that drive deeper, more profound conclusions about what needs to happen. I think that some of this fragmentation happened in Black Lives Matter or something. People drew conclusions about entering into electoral politics and some people drew conclusions about evolution. Some people drew conclusions that brought both of those things together. And so it's not. Do you agree with this? Or do you not agree with it? It's to me it's about creating the space where those discussions and engagements Can, can happen in a meaningful in productive,

Unknown Speaker  1:13:29  
productive way.

Unknown Speaker  1:13:31  
Okay, let's get a couple more questions we have in the queue. I think I can only take it probably about

Unknown Speaker  1:13:39  
are you in the queue? Are you just

Unknown Speaker  1:13:41  
Here you are. Okay, well, let's just get the last four questions. And then you

Unknown Speaker  1:13:46  
all pick and choose what you want to answer in

Unknown Speaker  1:13:48  
bringing us to a conclusion about that.

Unknown Speaker  1:13:55  
Thanks things that both of you talked about, so tanz, Illinois is one of the poorest parts of Illinois, and the people in that town rather than the government where the ones who wanted to be built there, the people in the town thought they would bring jobs and members of the town, including children wrote to the government was begging for a supermax prison to go out there. And give them that, like it's such a

Unknown Speaker  1:14:19  
we're desperate for money. And it seems like it's another

Unknown Speaker  1:14:22  
case where there's poverty and a lack of state accountability for

Unknown Speaker  1:14:25  
why there's such poverty there.

Unknown Speaker  1:14:28  
So in those situations, how do we shift the narratives, to encourage people

Unknown Speaker  1:14:32  
not to think of prisons as a

Unknown Speaker  1:14:34  
solution to economic problems, and to look at other ways of addressing those problems and then like looking to create more student accountability for the economic poverty that exists there?

Unknown Speaker  1:14:48  
Hi, I have a question. on the good side,

Unknown Speaker  1:14:50  
I think of what you guys are

Unknown Speaker  1:14:52  
talking about. So I think in this political moment, people have prison dreams and criminalization for Donald Trump and other politicians. And I mean that

Unknown Speaker  1:15:01  
even people on the left political spectrum are really excited about trials and prosecution. And we know what ma ga stands for if you follow

Unknown Speaker  1:15:09  
the Twitter's motherfucka getting arrested

Unknown Speaker  1:15:16  
for overseeing and watching it up a request or presentation for other kind of a politician, so I was

Unknown Speaker  1:15:23  
just curious if you guys can help us at this moment.

Unknown Speaker  1:15:30  
Yeah, I was just wondering if you can talk a little bit about the foremost agents of nationalization the police and how we incorporate

Unknown Speaker  1:15:39  
into our frameworks, and particularly community, lots of folks who may be able to imagine establishing a trickier time maybe a better understanding.

Unknown Speaker  1:15:57  
Thanks. Hi. I'm just wondering if you could maybe speak To the nonprofit industrial complex, my context is Skid Row. So we're talking about 50 blocks, and something like 200 nonprofits. And those groups collude with police. We're talking about disposability politics. And you know, folks who are in this Limbo, corporatist who are in the coastal state. And so those of us who are abolitionists are wondering how to work with nonprofits considering that, you know, folks need services, and we have been there for a couple hundred years.

Unknown Speaker  1:16:35  
What What, what does it mean? Like how do you work with these in and get, you know, reform that has revolution and potential

Unknown Speaker  1:16:48  
recession?

Unknown Speaker  1:16:54  
So there was a question about, I don't know if everyone heard and so there's a question of Tams,

Unknown Speaker  1:16:58  
which is the submasters So in Southern Illinois and

Unknown Speaker  1:17:03  
the discussion about, well, this is kind of jobs for people in that community. And so therefore the supportive and how do we, how do we deal with that?

Unknown Speaker  1:17:12  
I mean, there is no easy solution because it's, it's the way it's the way in which the Political Economy of rural areas has been restructured in prisons have become an economic development model. So we have to contest that economic development mode and then find if there are opportunities at the local level of you know, to do to do something differently and and that's a whole process of reallocating budgets and relocating and changing mindsets. I don't I don't think there's a solution. I'm a senior, there's a initiative they had milk, not jails in New York, where they would encourage farm farmers to go to dairy farmers to produce milk

Unknown Speaker  1:17:47  
and try

Unknown Speaker  1:17:49  
to get back as an industry that would be an alternative to, to, to jails and prisons as financial sparklin probably need to see what was possible within that local context. And that means dealing with local government and state officials that actually make those decisions around, you know, what, what the budgetary allocations are?

Unknown Speaker  1:18:12  
Yeah. That's, I mean, I

Unknown Speaker  1:18:15  
wish I had the solution. But, you know, it's

Unknown Speaker  1:18:17  
structural.

Unknown Speaker  1:18:20  
Yeah, you know, I don't, there's not an easy solution. To me, that's part of the

Unknown Speaker  1:18:26  
kind of overall

Unknown Speaker  1:18:29  
work that that people are in engaged with to, you know, on the most direct ways to try to take those political arguments on but this is, you know, this this is why socialism is no longer a dirty word in the United States because the the system as it exists doesn't work. And it doesn't work for increasing numbers of people and that has opened up

Unknown Speaker  1:18:55  
the possibility

Unknown Speaker  1:18:55  
for new kinds of discussions that discussion That we're, you know, mocked for years ago. But

Unknown Speaker  1:19:04  
you know, even earlier than that we're saying is impossible to have in this country. It's, you know, we're in a different time right now, because this is supposed to be a good economy, right? There's, you know, 3% of growth, Donald Trump will tell you every day that its historic lows of unemployment, and it just it doesn't matter because for millions of people, it's, you know, you might have a job or you might have three or four part time jobs that you might have health care, but it's shaping healthcare that's expensive. And they everyone's holding it together by assuming enormous amounts of debt debt that you will never pay off over the course of your life. So everybody just walks around with their debt to her. And this has meant that there is an opening to discuss the possibility of the different kind of way to organize Society in some ways, it's a limited discussion. You know, it's about healthcare, it's about college. But in the same way that we couldn't have these discussions A few years ago, we can now and so I think that that means that it's possible to address issues like this in a new in a new context, just to just quickly and I'll hand it back. Okay, so we have one minute to possibly take on all of these things. And I think, you know, I think that the the thirst for the imprisonment of members of the ruling class, you know, students on one level, but I think that,

Unknown Speaker  1:20:47  
you know,

Unknown Speaker  1:20:50  
I think the part of the argument is that, you know, there's something cathartic and talking about that, but we know that the prisons and the jails and the courts Part of setup for that, and that, in fact, they use egregious outrageous cases of people who are typically in prison to legitimize the system itself. And to, to say that this is proof that justice is blind, you know, because we we put one or two, you know, rich crooks, in prison. But we know that you know, that that's not who the presidents are for that they use those cases to try to rehabilitate their system. And I think that those are the, you know, the arguments that the that we have to take on in that context. And the last thing just about, I think people are much more open in my experience to police our mission than even prison abolition because the police, the visceral kind of impact of policing is is experienced in in a in some ways in a more general way. But even in imprisonment, but, you know, to me, it is all part of the similar discussion about what it means to say that a different world is possible at a moment when, you know, people are open to that idea in a somewhat new way, for the first time in a long term.

Unknown Speaker  1:22:20  
Thanks. Yeah.

Unknown Speaker  1:22:21  
So, so just to follow up on that, and then one other comment. So I think it's time we also started using this phrase working class. Because that's, that's been a term that hasn't been used in United States for a long time. And if you're going to talk about socialism, you can't not talk about the working class. And so, I mean, I talked about people who are in prison as marginalized sectors of the working class, there are people for whom the economy has said, We don't need you anymore. We're gonna lock you up. We're gonna put you in a cage. That's the job we got for you. That's the housing unit for you. But let's talk about because they deserve to be working. They deserve to be part of the working class, and they deserve to be part of the working class movement. So I think that's one one thing about dealing with that with that issue. Another thing I'm taken from the government off the cushion, I'm still going to make this point, because I think it's really important that we've been talking about this. I think we, we, you mentioned a little bit about this, about the important role of involving families and indecision, but I don't think we could overemphasize that. But when we talk about people who are critically impacted by mass incarceration, it's not just the people who are locked up. I mean, I know that I know that my partner, my kids, my mother, were drastically impacted by by me being locked up for six and a half years. And in my in my opinion, they, they separate a lot more than I did, because I didn't have responsibilities. All I had to do is what you know, wake up every day and, and go shower, right? I mean, in that sense, they had the shoulder all the responsibilities of my absence, and so and so there's great wisdom in in going through that struggle, and we have to tap into that wisdom. minute. And I think and I think my comrades, my formerly incarcerated men aren't necessarily always eager to jump to put that point forward. So I think we need to make sure that we have, as well as the fact that it's not only men that are incarcerated, right? There's formerly incarcerated women, but we still see mostly men leading that movement. So I think it's just something we need to keep.

Unknown Speaker  1:24:24  
All right, we have come to the end of our session, I just want to lift up the one question that didn't get answered. And maybe someone can pick it up and one of the next

Unknown Speaker  1:24:31  
sessions because all of these things are connected, which is to

Unknown Speaker  1:24:33  
speak to the nonprofit industrial complex, and the politics of disposability and collusion based on what the resources are the resources that are needed, but at the same time, what that means for the people who are being policed and caught up in the criminalization process. That was our last

Unknown Speaker  1:24:54  
question. Thank you very much to ky tea and to James. Thank you, Diana.

Unknown Speaker  1:35:00  
Too many morning if you can start moving back towards receipts.

Unknown Speaker  1:35:02  
Appreciate that. Thank you

Unknown Speaker  1:36:16  
Hello, hello. Hello, can you have your

Unknown Speaker  1:36:17  
attention please want to make a quick announcement.

Unknown Speaker  1:36:22  
Just following up on Garrett's call this way to think a little bit about how our members of the universities and colleges went along with us work with us on Ms. decarceration. A group of Harvard students have put out an appeal and has concerned scholars to sign on to a petition. And Garrett has just tweeted that out the movie Twitter and we're hoping people will continue to circulate that off that Twitter account and put it out. This is a peel the Harvard did not 10 years University of Pena

Unknown Speaker  1:36:53  
Professor seminars this morning was talking about your work the second opening freedom schools in Mississippi in the 1960s undocumented students in Georgia were banned from the top five research institutes version of Garcia Pena got in touch with the Georgia undocumented youth Alliance and they opened a freedom school in Georgia freedom University, where she was the driving force visionary on the faculty side of that effort. That school freedom University continues to leave this out on in work against immigrant detention. After doing that important work, Porsche went to Harvard where she was an assistant professor wrote a triple award winning book dominie County data and contradiction in one one of the colleges to highest teaching awards, both at the graduate level and at the undergraduate level. Right now these students are sitting in in Harvard, they're having massive demonstrations to protest this decision.

Unknown Speaker  1:37:44  
lorisha your member that Trump said that Haiti was a shithole country. The best the best scholars in the field, the Dominican studies, completion studies and American Studies wrote in on Georgia Garcia's tenure review and said This is one of the finest scholars we've seen in the history of a

Unknown Speaker  1:38:03  
field. And Harvard essentially said, Well, this is a shithole field. We don't care what these major scholars think. So we would really hope that you would join us in twittering out this appeal for laboratory knowledge at our university. So I'm going to turn it over to Jorge.

Unknown Speaker  1:38:23  
Just to echo everything that Pamela said as a as a young scholar of color at at a college right now.

Unknown Speaker  1:38:30  
Professor Garcia pens His work has been extremely formative in her work

Unknown Speaker  1:38:34  
on kind of introducing African united and very critical

Unknown Speaker  1:38:37  
ways to the field has been pathbreaking. And so I just want to echo that she has

Unknown Speaker  1:38:42  
been a kind of beacon of hope and a really important

Unknown Speaker  1:38:44  
model for me

Unknown Speaker  1:38:46  
at these places, and this tenure night was a huge

Unknown Speaker  1:38:50  
blow to both the legitimacy of Latinx and ethnic studies and cognitive fields,

Unknown Speaker  1:38:55  
but also

Unknown Speaker  1:38:56  
to young people trying to sort of enter into the Academy.

Unknown Speaker  1:39:00  
transform it and to do the work that, that we're often sort

Unknown Speaker  1:39:03  
of discussing here today.

Unknown Speaker  1:39:07  
Yeah, like the rest of you are

Unknown Speaker  1:39:09  
probably

Unknown Speaker  1:39:10  
tired of hearing about Harvard in the news. Um, but this is a very, very important case for us at Harvard and I think for for

Unknown Speaker  1:39:19  
African Studies, and I really hope that you can take the time to, to learn about it and engage or what I can tell you about Harvard is that it is an institution which is allergic to bad for us. So I think that the more that we can lift this up, the better

Unknown Speaker  1:39:35  
um, I would be remiss if I did

Unknown Speaker  1:39:38  
not mention that are terrific, heroic, and very brave, very committed and completely fucking unflappable,

Unknown Speaker  1:39:45  
graduate students are on strike.

Unknown Speaker  1:39:48  
So please look that up as well.

Unknown Speaker  1:39:54  
So the way just got sent out, so please sign on. Thank you.

Unknown Speaker  1:40:23  
Alright, so I'm just going to do a very brief introduction to this next panel. So you'll notice on the program that we sort of slotted in a couple of public history projects both time slots, today and tomorrow to think about how the humanities and public history work can inform abolition. So one of the first things that I did when I thought about moving to Mississippi and working at the University of Mississippi was parchman. And I wanted to do everything within my capacity as a story. University to close parchment. So one of the things that I did this first summer down here was work to get funding from a couple of different places who I'd like to thank Harvard's Center for Public Interest careers. Forward us, again, the College of Liberal Arts here as well as Southern studies. And what we were able to do is fund five student interns for a 10 week

Unknown Speaker  1:41:26  
program.

Unknown Speaker  1:41:28  
The inaugural parchment oral history project. And the idea really behind it was every year to focus on a particular area of incarceration and Mississippi and document oral histories of currently incarcerated and formerly incarcerated people. So this summer is focus, because I think it might take us a little time to get to the point where doing oral histories and Mississippi prisons was around a series of mass arrests in 1970. So if you were here for my opening remarks, I mentioned those that have been honored 1970 but in fact, over 1000 students that year across the state, which we typically remember, as the two murders at Jackson State, if we even know of those, usually Kent State is all we talked about. But in addition to those two murders, over 1000 students were incarcerated in these mass arrests, including 890, Mississippi Valley State, which remains to this day, the largest mass arrests of students in US history. So I won't give away all of the historical tidbits because we have a brief documentary that we're going to show by a couple of our student filmmakers. And then what we're going to do afterwards is have a panel discussion. moderated by our very own Ralph Eubanks, as with the students who did the documentary, oral storytelling project, as well as a couple of the former student activists, Theo King, and Donald Cole, who were arrested during 1970 so screen that for about 70 minutes Members thanks.

Unknown Speaker  1:43:09  
National Guard at Kent State University open fire on students non violently protesting the bombing of Cambodia on May 4 1977.

Unknown Speaker  1:43:24  
Just 11 days later, city and state police killed Philip Lafayette games and games are green during a protest at Jackson State University in Mississippi. But these were only the deputies at a state repression that year.

Unknown Speaker  1:43:43  
In 1970, over 1000 students, some as young as 11 years old, were arrested for their activism in Mississippi. Many will take into the notorious prison Nomex parchman Farm as the 50th anniversary set the massacres Kent State in Jackson, the faith approach, we documented the lesson no but no less important student activism that took place at Mississippi Valley State University and the University of Mississippi that same year.

Unknown Speaker  1:44:21  
There was an opportunity to go to college you were encouraged. I wondered about the instructor, the teachers, the counselors, but the community pushed you to go to college. I

Unknown Speaker  1:44:30  
really had blocked it out and didn't call me all the students rushed to the dominoes. And there are probably approximately 900 students on board and that the same buses in and they take they took us all to the brain, cookie, county jail. So we will take generally it was through signing Russo common law we were we've really had had been going on

Unknown Speaker  1:44:51  
and then all of

Unknown Speaker  1:44:52  
a sudden somebody went in the restroom and looked at one

Unknown Speaker  1:44:55  
and at the bathroom,

Unknown Speaker  1:44:57  
they saw somebody want to buy his own

Unknown Speaker  1:44:59  
way Hell with a life.

Unknown Speaker  1:45:01  
I can see that day has scary as I'm talking to you. I think it's etched in my memory. Nothing was reserved

Unknown Speaker  1:45:10  
for

Unknown Speaker  1:45:14  
students had been demonstrating and forecasting

Unknown Speaker  1:45:16  
for different reasons. And of course now the year that we entered this device I entered this classic University

Unknown Speaker  1:45:21  
was the same year a few months later

Unknown Speaker  1:45:25  
powering the assassination of

Unknown Speaker  1:45:27  
Martin Luther King Jr. Civil Rights, women's rights protest the unnamed walls in protest.

Unknown Speaker  1:45:34  
Remember when Obama French of Jim Crow, things are getting a little bit better. But why people in Mississippi still thought that they were supposed to govern by five

Unknown Speaker  1:45:47  
because the system is working 6768 when they're

Unknown Speaker  1:45:53  
protesting quite a bit

Unknown Speaker  1:45:55  
seemed like a daily part of my class.

Unknown Speaker  1:46:01  
Steady new progress now. I really was not a leader. I mean I did follow but

Unknown Speaker  1:46:11  
I was really not the leader

Unknown Speaker  1:46:15  
me a little more

Unknown Speaker  1:46:20  
Don't misunderstand

Unknown Speaker  1:46:24  
that I could recognize

Unknown Speaker  1:46:26  
that generation that actually thought

Unknown Speaker  1:46:28  
that we were responsible for being changed ages and, and and changing the

Unknown Speaker  1:46:33  
world knew something

Unknown Speaker  1:46:41  
was serious that was happening.

Unknown Speaker  1:46:44  
So I looked at stop University.

Unknown Speaker  1:46:52  
Jane Thank you. Marilyn was formerly a model at the University of Mississippi was kind of scared

Unknown Speaker  1:46:57  
even in some

Unknown Speaker  1:46:59  
states a seventh grader

Unknown Speaker  1:47:01  
smelling tear games

Unknown Speaker  1:47:03  
and after remember seeing me looking white faces,

Unknown Speaker  1:47:11  
sci

Unknown Speaker  1:47:13  
fi individuals. And I just said to myself

Unknown Speaker  1:47:19  
never took place

Unknown Speaker  1:47:20  
like that.

Unknown Speaker  1:47:22  
The University of Mississippi was

Unknown Speaker  1:47:24  
the university in Sydney

Unknown Speaker  1:47:27  
at that time.

Unknown Speaker  1:47:28  
Oh, I thought it was in the league with hard but I mean, that's just where I felt our

Unknown Speaker  1:47:35  
freshmen coming in

Unknown Speaker  1:47:37  
six years after the University of Ghana.

Unknown Speaker  1:47:41  
And it was my understanding,

Unknown Speaker  1:47:43  
I hope

Unknown Speaker  1:47:44  
America at the university has been thoroughly integrate

Unknown Speaker  1:47:48  
them or maybe 200 black students equal

Unknown Speaker  1:47:52  
to last minutes

Unknown Speaker  1:47:55  
and maybe 10 to 10,000 lights.

Unknown Speaker  1:47:58  
You're invisible for the most part.

Unknown Speaker  1:48:01  
We formed

Unknown Speaker  1:48:04  
in a multi purposes to hate social purposes for us to get together and socialize with one another

Unknown Speaker  1:48:14  
political purposes

Unknown Speaker  1:48:14  
of trying to

Unknown Speaker  1:48:18  
collectively face the arts and the administration, if you will,

Unknown Speaker  1:48:23  
somewhere in the process of name of student ministry where they're introduced to Moses.

Unknown Speaker  1:48:29  
One of the things that we did I remember that was so dramatic, it was enough

Unknown Speaker  1:48:34  
that we can each take a tape,

Unknown Speaker  1:48:35  
we all step at an individual table, we play

Unknown Speaker  1:48:39  
the table and watch American Sit down. I said,

Unknown Speaker  1:48:44  
my friend said at another table, and so on, which resulted in in there not having

Unknown Speaker  1:48:50  
a place to sit down and

Unknown Speaker  1:48:54  
look around and see the faces of whites as they walk in the room and Hickok and looking for places Sit down, but there's no place to sit factor we went over to the Chancellor's house in Mammoth, to speak to them. I mean, at night like about 910 o'clock at night,

Unknown Speaker  1:49:10  
we had

Unknown Speaker  1:49:12  
given up the man's to minister to the chancellor,

Unknown Speaker  1:49:18  
and he

Unknown Speaker  1:49:19  
essence and

Unknown Speaker  1:49:23  
somebody pointed out, they said, Look behind you on a 30 foot and the highway patrol was sitting there, I guess they have two sharp shooters that was sitting there with the rifle pointed out and so we're just going from one degree to another as we journal thinking different ideas and follow people come up with different ideas of things that we can do to bring attention to discrimination and the second waves that are mix

Unknown Speaker  1:49:48  
this up with the people who want to say international group that was kind of on campus, I mean, property in

Unknown Speaker  1:49:56  
a lot of attention. And so the perfect thing here for us today

Unknown Speaker  1:50:02  
And when we walked into no world, we didn't know that it was a coma shocked. And it was like, almost two hours I believe too long ago charge. And so we went in there. And so what we're going to do, and the guy that was leading us at the time,

Unknown Speaker  1:50:21  
he said, we've already played our beef into the chapel, and then walked on

Unknown Speaker  1:50:27  
to the stage and actually disrupted the

Unknown Speaker  1:50:29  
performance.

Unknown Speaker  1:50:30  
And we'd have a champ is that time in the chip was what you're going to do. And the response would do it to me. What you're going to do do it to what you're going to do that. So we chant all the way out of the fourth chapter, and let it be

Unknown Speaker  1:50:47  
march down. After the peaceful protest, we were

Unknown Speaker  1:50:53  
arrested.

Unknown Speaker  1:50:54  
So we walk down and there's a circle

Unknown Speaker  1:50:59  
that happens To be the very first time many only time in our book which

Unknown Speaker  1:51:06  
a girl was calling me. So the way it was

Unknown Speaker  1:51:12  
so follow me along with this rifle and that was an easy to

Unknown Speaker  1:51:18  
be said my name is chief trainer

Unknown Speaker  1:51:23  
Mr. Howard tro he said all You are under arrest is it won't take you to jail to take somebody to Astra the Fayette County Jail and that's that we will take down part

Unknown Speaker  1:51:37  
and they were taking the parchment to make a point

Unknown Speaker  1:51:42  
we or since apartment on the buses put into these sales you know just

Unknown Speaker  1:51:49  
you know groups of girls and all we did was just

Unknown Speaker  1:51:52  
sit there and talk less insane until we release and brought back to us. So

Unknown Speaker  1:52:00  
And we got them zero they already know the file was a you know years coming up in the suspended you know kicked out of school. Interesting thing is

Unknown Speaker  1:52:12  
that nobody knows so this is how they made a decision to expose a

Unknown Speaker  1:52:20  
ever been to the Delta see so much red flag in my life.

Unknown Speaker  1:52:25  
I did not grow up

Unknown Speaker  1:52:26  
in this optimistic adopter had

Unknown Speaker  1:52:28  
a different culture a different orientation.

Unknown Speaker  1:52:31  
Located in a small delta town and intervener. Mississippi Valley State College now can University witness two years of escalating student protests before February 1970. demands range from allowing women students access to cars, hiring a full time position and student control over the activity Fund and the naming of buildings now

Unknown Speaker  1:53:00  
It was just it was a very, very

Unknown Speaker  1:53:03  
conservative school. When I first

Unknown Speaker  1:53:07  
enrolled there

Unknown Speaker  1:53:09  
girls Blackwell campus

Unknown Speaker  1:53:12  
in the administration that long as the package

Unknown Speaker  1:53:15  
here is to be part of learning

Unknown Speaker  1:53:19  
about rainy up the quality of

Unknown Speaker  1:53:22  
instructions is the black box black here,

Unknown Speaker  1:53:26  
nationally appeared, then need inspection.

Unknown Speaker  1:53:28  
So you hear them poor instruction by poor instructors. We will look at the one thing and we didn't know we were starting to fire. You know, we didn't know we were trying to tie we were just trying to get some stupid facts

Unknown Speaker  1:53:45  
about money. And then it became about student

Unknown Speaker  1:53:50  
freedom simply resisted. The Student Government

Unknown Speaker  1:53:56  
feels and so they're excited

Unknown Speaker  1:53:58  
to do with Muhlenberg in the 60s

Unknown Speaker  1:54:01  
we have to have a board. And we will go over to march with

Unknown Speaker  1:54:05  
battle hammer and Charles Evers

Unknown Speaker  1:54:07  
and those kinds of people and wanting to begin to challenge the

Unknown Speaker  1:54:10  
administration

Unknown Speaker  1:54:10  
about allowing us to have those persons speak at a lycium events. And that's what they really need unrest in the protesting, and the boycotting and the citians and all that kind of me for that.

Unknown Speaker  1:54:24  
We were making that list of things that this and so then we presented to

Unknown Speaker  1:54:29  
the administration, and they did not even act like what we presented was serious diplomacy.

Unknown Speaker  1:54:38  
You gotta entertain. If you don't want to

Unknown Speaker  1:54:41  
do then you gotta go to school

Unknown Speaker  1:54:45  
on February 10, with almost the entire student body boycotting classes, nearly 900 students and Mississippi Valley State College were rested and what remains the largest student arrest in us.

Unknown Speaker  1:55:01  
Terrell, nothing was the first to be arrested and

Unknown Speaker  1:55:04  
I was probably second or third.

Unknown Speaker  1:55:14  
He was in jail, then

Unknown Speaker  1:55:18  
we'll find people volunteer, volunteer their bus.

Unknown Speaker  1:55:22  
And then when they get on the bus, they're more like,

Unknown Speaker  1:55:29  
get out of it.

Unknown Speaker  1:55:32  
Using federal funding from the newly created law enforcement assistance administration, the state recruited 56 black police officers from around the state to make the arrest. Even deputizing black custodial workers on campus for fear that white arresting officers might lead to a violent confrontation.

Unknown Speaker  1:55:56  
This plan because again,

Unknown Speaker  1:55:59  
for these guys

Unknown Speaker  1:56:00  
from all over the state with blackness,

Unknown Speaker  1:56:05  
which I was not I think about that.

Unknown Speaker  1:56:09  
I think that was a good thing. But again, that was

Unknown Speaker  1:56:18  
unable to stop.

Unknown Speaker  1:56:19  
officers were they understood that these kids came from our community,

Unknown Speaker  1:56:25  
we're educated, like

Unknown Speaker  1:56:30  
to come over here to kill this is something he can be used

Unknown Speaker  1:56:36  
to simply saying, you know,

Unknown Speaker  1:56:38  
us, us, us, you all to

Unknown Speaker  1:56:40  
kill us young folks, because that was

Unknown Speaker  1:56:43  
that was traumatized and you know, by 800 and some kids to be incarcerated, either apartment

Unknown Speaker  1:56:50  
or in the full county jail or whatever the case may be. We knew that that

Unknown Speaker  1:56:55  
was your tactics. That was the tactic of intimidation. Try to break the

Unknown Speaker  1:57:00  
spirit here. So you

Unknown Speaker  1:57:04  
won't do this anymore. Use the words.

Unknown Speaker  1:57:08  
I don't find it all.

Unknown Speaker  1:57:09  
And when I think about

Unknown Speaker  1:57:11  
anyone getting arrested or breaking the law, have flashbacks to it, it's a penitentiary.

Unknown Speaker  1:57:19  
Young thought about that is the place of

Unknown Speaker  1:57:24  
the human as

Unknown Speaker  1:57:26  
worthy. You've done

Unknown Speaker  1:57:27  
something in your life.

Unknown Speaker  1:57:31  
Like, I don't think we needed to have been sent to jail or

Unknown Speaker  1:57:36  
departure. But somebody made that decision and somebody

Unknown Speaker  1:57:41  
in a hard position made that

Unknown Speaker  1:57:42  
decision after the dismal environment that

Unknown Speaker  1:57:46  
would be to know that day after day, year after year that you're going to be there. I applaud anyone who has been able

Unknown Speaker  1:57:54  
to survive that and continue their lives.

Unknown Speaker  1:58:02  
Because we were told in early

Unknown Speaker  1:58:07  
and

Unknown Speaker  1:58:09  
suddenly that we were

Unknown Speaker  1:58:14  
doing a spring of that summer, Jay issue Valley, they

Unknown Speaker  1:58:19  
were all over

Unknown Speaker  1:58:20  
and it wasn't as I mentioned to you earlier, it wasn't just one incident thing.

Unknown Speaker  1:58:25  
It was all coordinate

Unknown Speaker  1:58:26  
spray period or black

Unknown Speaker  1:58:27  
students across the

Unknown Speaker  1:58:28  
campus campuses of the stage students it

Unknown Speaker  1:58:32  
can say I was forced to sit there and get killed for protesting in March and Kent State in Ohio, where later to students get killed at Jackson State. And we have an old mess. And so before we hear about all of this, my brother was at Jackson State at the time, and so we're just getting more and more any rain if you will,

Unknown Speaker  1:58:57  
for us to say

Unknown Speaker  1:59:01  
resulted in individuals losing their lives. And it would be nothing for that to happen here. And I am sure that there were people who wish that that was the case here. And we were aware that around that not only about the synchronicity at that time, but even around the nation and we're different kinds of

Unknown Speaker  1:59:19  
student activism taking place. One key goal the war workers and what's going on with

Unknown Speaker  1:59:30  
the point is the national level. Now, what are we going to do an hour period now,

Unknown Speaker  1:59:37  
there's called college is greater

Unknown Speaker  1:59:39  
than I am.

Unknown Speaker  1:59:41  
So we wouldn't actually sacrifice our lives for

Unknown Speaker  1:59:49  
the students and other people who were there. will understand that.

Unknown Speaker  1:59:55  
They are standing on all the people's shoulders. It was a sacrifice

Unknown Speaker  2:00:49  
So please join me in welcoming the parchment Oral History Project Dr. Cole

Unknown Speaker  2:00:54  
can come back banks to say

Unknown Speaker  2:01:42  
Welcome everyone, I run events I'm glad to happy to welcome to this panel discussion

Unknown Speaker  2:01:49  
and I want to

Unknown Speaker  2:01:50  
introduce all of our panelists here.

Unknown Speaker  2:01:56  
So we'll start here with Catherine Angel Catherine is a southern studies graduate student

Unknown Speaker  2:02:04  
and with an emphasis on documentary expression and is going to be starting her

Unknown Speaker  2:02:08  
MFA and documented in the fall correct.

Unknown Speaker  2:02:13  
And next to her is Carol Johnson. And tiara is a junior to college, and while majoring in history and education, your plans on researching women's narratives in specific history and next to Kara is Jasmine Stansberry. Jasmine is a PhD student in history at the University of Mississippi and her research is on black social movements in the 20th century us south.

Unknown Speaker  2:02:47  
And next to Jasmine is

Unknown Speaker  2:02:52  
your king and who is a native of West Point Mississippi and entered Mississippi Valley State University of Iowa bands coming Ship claimed both flute and Piccolo

Unknown Speaker  2:03:03  
and went on to, which I found really fascinating to find to find out about that after this panel.

Unknown Speaker  2:03:12  
But right now in Dr. King's officially call by this St. Luke's congregation and the Presbyterian of Mississippi officially installed as teaching elder pastoral staff of St. Luke's Presbyterian Church, USA. And next year, Dr. King is Donald Cole, who is America's administrator and faculty member at the University of Mississippi, where he was assistant provost and associate professor of mathematics. And at the end panel is an all Akbar Khan, who graduated from Harvard College in May, where she studied African American states and she completed a creative thesis exploring authenticity of voice As a writer of color, so I did start in

Unknown Speaker  2:04:24  
I guess I'd like to start is with

Unknown Speaker  2:04:28  
our two subjects in the in the documentary. Starting with with you Dr. King.

Unknown Speaker  2:04:35  
What I don't know if you've read

Unknown Speaker  2:04:39  
seeing a mirrored seen by just one more character and seeing that Erickson says about parchment, this is a place for

Unknown Speaker  2:04:47  
the dead.

Unknown Speaker  2:04:51  
Tell us about that experience of being in parcher.

Unknown Speaker  2:04:56  
Did you What did what did you What was your sense of that? Does that echo You that being a place for the dead? Well I got a convention too many

Unknown Speaker  2:05:06  
saw the brains cannulated that was on.

Unknown Speaker  2:05:11  
She was the one that went and Tyrone, get it and he was one that went well and

Unknown Speaker  2:05:18  
now was to get on the bus to go to passion.

Unknown Speaker  2:05:24  
And then the key you have to stay here as the oh my god

Unknown Speaker  2:05:30  
what a relief. Sorry.

Unknown Speaker  2:05:35  
But I had the responsibility

Unknown Speaker  2:05:38  
of getting in contact with law students.

Unknown Speaker  2:05:43  
As matter of fact we are having Joseph return to brother of mine.

Unknown Speaker  2:05:48  
Yes. We are

Unknown Speaker  2:05:56  
getting contact with themselves

Unknown Speaker  2:05:58  
and then the last Students both black and white came over from its own this came to Mississippi State of excuse me, this Valley State alone, Attorney, Sanders of Greenwood and

Unknown Speaker  2:06:12  
formulated a coalition who banded together to work the scheme of getting the 800 and some odd to those 900 students out of caution. That was the program that was

Unknown Speaker  2:06:26  
but the treachery I had

Unknown Speaker  2:06:29  
known about possible

Unknown Speaker  2:06:31  
was something very serious because my grandmother brother was put into partially because he did not have a job.

Unknown Speaker  2:06:39  
See, and that was the

Unknown Speaker  2:06:40  
misery and the fear that all black men had

Unknown Speaker  2:06:44  
when they heard the word caution. You know, it was definitely

Unknown Speaker  2:06:47  
just hear about the word crosman gets rid of Cheers and beard, and it was

Unknown Speaker  2:06:53  
something that made you want to put a week of pregnancy

Unknown Speaker  2:06:55  
if you want to be a do

Unknown Speaker  2:06:59  
right Man will do right and you're going to project. Now,

Unknown Speaker  2:07:07  
Dr. Cole, and this is about the few months after what's happening, someone's sending the film that this is the French of Jim Crow. And I think we've talked a lot. The film talks about what was happening with 1971. Everything that was happening in 1970. Was that was the first year of court order school integration in Mississippi, schools integrated officially Mississippi on January 8 of 1970. How did you see that linkage what was actually happening? Do you see that connection about me? So let me first

Unknown Speaker  2:07:45  
start out by complimenting those who have anything to do with this thing that was a great

Unknown Speaker  2:07:58  
proper see

Unknown Speaker  2:08:01  
The only thing that was bad about it was that I was in

Unknown Speaker  2:08:06  
none of that stuff. I'm originally from Jackson, Mississippi, it's the largest city in Mississippi, Mississippi has no large cities.

Unknown Speaker  2:08:15  
And in

Unknown Speaker  2:08:19  
the school system there was totally integrated. And I think when I was in 11th grade in the south, I had a choice if I wanted to, I could go to the, quote, white school. And, you know, I had the right man, we all have the freedom to go over and be isolated at the, at the white school. So I chose not to, there were one or two other people who who did, and it was not a that was a 1960 1968 from high school with him. So a couple of years prior, I think that our integration sort of came along. mandate

Unknown Speaker  2:09:02  
and everything else came along with it. And so as I diverse Mississippi as a freshman,

Unknown Speaker  2:09:09  
and as I mentioned,

Unknown Speaker  2:09:10  
even there in the film, there was a six years after the institution had been integrated. And so integration for me in my mind and not the school I've been totally integrated with, I had no idea that

Unknown Speaker  2:09:27  
in 1962, only one individual 1963 two or three others came before the service came. So when I got here, that was a big, massive amount of

Unknown Speaker  2:09:42  
people on the call.

Unknown Speaker  2:09:44  
But I was really surprised to find out that general

Unknown Speaker  2:09:49  
pockets

Unknown Speaker  2:09:53  
were desperate not to teach an individual

Unknown Speaker  2:10:00  
Served individuals like me. And you, Leo, I had not had experience of integration in the past with them. This is my first time experiencing integration. And to my surprise,

Unknown Speaker  2:10:16  
it was not what I had expected as a 90 freshman.

Unknown Speaker  2:10:24  
Well, that gets me to another question

Unknown Speaker  2:10:26  
for both of you thinking about that time. The other thing that was was happening and Mississippi was a man by the name Roberts was the head of the institution of higher learning, or, and he the torso said in December of 1969. If there was a definition of a rate racism in a textbook, it's me

Unknown Speaker  2:10:49  
and I claim

Unknown Speaker  2:10:51  
and that's what you were up against you were up against, from the very top this people who were openly Saying that they were racist and they were defending. Take it from them.

Unknown Speaker  2:11:05  
Yes, you know, in

Unknown Speaker  2:11:09  
their name this morning.

Unknown Speaker  2:11:13  
I believe that the stadium down in Mississippi at Southern Mississippi, it's gonna be a rocky stick saving.

Unknown Speaker  2:11:20  
And I heard that this morning it

Unknown Speaker  2:11:23  
went to me.

Unknown Speaker  2:11:25  
So here I am having to face if you will, him the

Unknown Speaker  2:11:32  
head of the ihL we have to go before him. And it was no way for that to be after his outspoken and they carry themselves such that any justice at all would be served and we knew that. And because of that. We went in very fact we bring in, if you will, of giving poems by black artists. We will And calling him a racist. We went in because we knew that there was no way to anything fair come out of it. So those the micro economists

Unknown Speaker  2:12:12  
in your thoughts.

Unknown Speaker  2:12:15  
I didn't know the man,

Unknown Speaker  2:12:18  
the pump sequences.

Unknown Speaker  2:12:20  
When we

Unknown Speaker  2:12:21  
presented our demands to the administration at Mississippi Valley State University, we were treated as we and we presented those demands with

Unknown Speaker  2:12:36  
honor and respect to the administration,

Unknown Speaker  2:12:38  
going through the due process

Unknown Speaker  2:12:41  
of bringing about change.

Unknown Speaker  2:12:44  
Then we will treat it as though that we was toppers

Unknown Speaker  2:12:48  
as far as they're concerned. And then we then start

Unknown Speaker  2:12:51  
seeing things happen.

Unknown Speaker  2:12:54  
One of the things that was happening, Eric

Unknown Speaker  2:12:55  
thing that you put forth, were denied and it was not necessarily

Unknown Speaker  2:12:59  
denied by

Unknown Speaker  2:13:00  
President right?

Unknown Speaker  2:13:03  
The institution, but we knew it was coming from the HL.

Unknown Speaker  2:13:08  
We knew then that

Unknown Speaker  2:13:09  
everything we put

Unknown Speaker  2:13:10  
forward, it was going to be the land passed on and then passed on to us by the HL.

Unknown Speaker  2:13:16  
And so then what we knew then but we

Unknown Speaker  2:13:19  
will be stopped responding.

Unknown Speaker  2:13:22  
The praise can be denied, then we staged the setting.

Unknown Speaker  2:13:29  
And then the next thing that they did, they order the police to come in the, you know,

Unknown Speaker  2:13:35  
the black leads from from

Unknown Speaker  2:13:37  
around the state to come in.

Unknown Speaker  2:13:40  
We took a big,

Unknown Speaker  2:13:40  
deep breath behind that because we knew what had

Unknown Speaker  2:13:43  
happened in Jackson State and

Unknown Speaker  2:13:45  
other places where people were shot and killed by

Unknown Speaker  2:13:47  
quite often since I came on

Unknown Speaker  2:13:48  
cameras. So then when the black officers came

Unknown Speaker  2:13:52  
on campus, we did take a sigh of relief because they can pose

Unknown Speaker  2:14:00  
They look like us. And they cheated up introspect.

Unknown Speaker  2:14:03  
And without temptation code that didn't work.

Unknown Speaker  2:14:07  
So the H l did another thing they brought in all the buses, and they never did arrest that's, which was a constitutional flaw

Unknown Speaker  2:14:16  
on their part. But then we knew that there was another guy

Unknown Speaker  2:14:20  
that was leading that direction. And that guy's name was all man, Jim Crow.

Unknown Speaker  2:14:29  
And his code that come from the town immediately

Unknown Speaker  2:14:32  
after reconstruction, the black codes, that if you want to

Unknown Speaker  2:14:36  
keep a negro

Unknown Speaker  2:14:39  
in his or her place, then you

Unknown Speaker  2:14:41  
trade them will take them them to prison to take them to prosper.

Unknown Speaker  2:14:45  
And that's what was behind

Unknown Speaker  2:14:48  
the decision, not by the president of the school, but by the leaders in our HL institution of higher learning

Unknown Speaker  2:14:57  
for the state of Mississippi. And there

Unknown Speaker  2:15:00  
whole premise was to break those negros

Unknown Speaker  2:15:03  
knows that I'm

Unknown Speaker  2:15:04  
saying negros to keep them saying nigger.

Unknown Speaker  2:15:08  
Now, but that's the word that they use. Now, I'm not No, I'm not going to use the word because that being admitted American around the truth, well, that's what we just call

Unknown Speaker  2:15:19  
with nobody is that

Unknown Speaker  2:15:20  
where you are in Word now anyway,

Unknown Speaker  2:15:23  
so then, so then they

Unknown Speaker  2:15:25  
push and try to push to break us. And every black person in the state of Mississippi had fear of going to posh. That was an intimidating, dehumanizing thought, because we knew about it from our parents and other folks that parts from have been very innovative. So they tried to break out the spirit was the threat. They tried to break our spirit by sending us there,

Unknown Speaker  2:15:52  
but it did not happen. You know,

Unknown Speaker  2:15:55  
thank God for the last ones that are here and

Unknown Speaker  2:16:00  
For the lawyer that was in Greenwood was able to simply

Unknown Speaker  2:16:06  
give up some justice and

Unknown Speaker  2:16:08  
get us released within 48 hours.

Unknown Speaker  2:16:13  
To get up out of bed, they did that.

Unknown Speaker  2:16:16  
Jasmine, we were talking about this earlier, this is what we can both these cases with with openness. And with Mississippi Valley. These are assertions of black power. And we don't necessarily think about that assertion of black power is coming from the south. Could you talk about that? Just a little bit about how you see this fitting in with the way we think about black freedom struggle in the USA?

Unknown Speaker  2:16:47  
Definitely, I would agree, I definitely think that I mean, looking at historically, there have been historians sort of start to focus more and more on link powering stuff, but typically what people think of that language How would they think about the East Coast? They think about, you know, the Black Panther Party in Chicago, they think about Oakland and people like you, Julie, p new and Bobby Seale, although they are the ones who took that symbol of the Black Panther from Alabama, but that's another story. But definitely, what I appreciate about being able to be a part of this documentary and to look at some of the history is to highlight how black people have always been fighting for black power. And here in the south, typically what people think about the south, they should think about slavery, right? They think about Jim Crow, even though Jim Crow originated in the north, but that's another story. But what I appreciate is that we're able to talk about how we have black people in the south who are not just thinking by just being beaten, but they will resisting and even after the period where Dr. King was assassinated, where scholars typically say is still the right solution. And it, what you see here in the south is that black people were still fighting for their rights. And so what you see is a continuation of the long longer black freedom struggle. So definitely, I definitely appreciate, you know, the second were able to have like this

Unknown Speaker  2:18:19  
bit from our interviewers and storyteller. So what is it that you can say that each of you really learn from this, this process of interviewing these people who were involved in? freedom struggle in Mississippi in the 70s? So who wants to open up?

Unknown Speaker  2:18:39  
Okay, good.

Unknown Speaker  2:18:43  
So, Dr. Thompson and really just backward devastated just to see like, student activism in 1970. The fact is, two schools were this now be integrated in 1970 BC, just as a voice, we are interview we students with Charleston high school who are since a parchman. In 1970s. Lou, and that was a high school.

Unknown Speaker  2:19:08  
Tell us a little bit about that. So because that's one of the things that

Unknown Speaker  2:19:13  
tell us a bit about the Charleston High School,

Unknown Speaker  2:19:16  
those Charleston High School was will.

Unknown Speaker  2:19:21  
I don't want to do short bleed. It wasn't really my area.

Unknown Speaker  2:19:28  
Courtney who helped a ton with the rough cut of this film and really focused on everything that was happening in Charleston, we initially had, like three sites of interest. And when Charleston is integrating, and they were protesting, people as young as 11, including shared, were taken department and 11 year old so that was

Unknown Speaker  2:20:01  
I mean, the most shameful I'm sure part of that, but

Unknown Speaker  2:20:06  
so that was another student unrest in the Delta at that time.

Unknown Speaker  2:20:22  
Hi, okay.

Unknown Speaker  2:20:24  
Yeah, thank you, everyone for speaking to, you know, what we, as students, historians, took away from this experience, I think for me,

Unknown Speaker  2:20:37  
I really struggled to feel like I had any right to be here that I have any

Unknown Speaker  2:20:46  
ownership over

Unknown Speaker  2:20:46  
this project. And I'm really grateful to my cohort for helping me to feel like I was a part of this team. So I yeah, as you heard from my bio, I went to Harvard and I just graduated, and I'm from New York. So I just Felt like

Unknown Speaker  2:21:02  
to go like skin like,

Unknown Speaker  2:21:05  
like a northerner trying to come in and take ownership of it was

Unknown Speaker  2:21:10  
that isn't mine, you know.

Unknown Speaker  2:21:14  
But I think that having this team and being able to explore these stories together and trying to become more of a support role

Unknown Speaker  2:21:24  
was how I found the place to be helpful and useful and

Unknown Speaker  2:21:30  
also trying to I mean, okay, so since we've done this, and I do want to credit all the people we've interviewed, really, I've been arrested for civil disobedience. And, honestly,

Unknown Speaker  2:21:45  
you know, having these stories and knowing that this is part of a history of just so many decades, forever resisting oppression in this country, and specifically We're protesting Microsoft in New York City and their collaboration with ice. And for me, my locus of effort has happened around integration because I'm a salesman and a brand. But honestly, issues of black liberation, and it is how I start, how I navigated my relationship to this country of understanding that a lot of being American is honestly fighting for your place here. And now, these stories and these efforts that this has been going on for so long, that's that students have been doing this work. You just heard about stuff that's happening at Harvard. And even just two weeks ago at Harvard, Yale, we disrupted the game and people literally I saw someone spot on. We saw people but it's just it's just a like knowing that this is part of something so major and central to the history of being a the fabric of this country, I'm done so wide region but and I'll just talk a little about Charles gonna say Charleston has a really interesting

Unknown Speaker  2:23:20  
place to go and in comparing to our efforts to understand what was happening at the University of Mississippi, Mississippi Valley State

Unknown Speaker  2:23:31  
because those student activists were so young, they were in high school, like Catherine talked about one of the Cherie, she's 11. So what that meant is it was it was honestly more difficult to integrate ourselves within that community and to gain trust. And part of why we didn't include some of that in this documentary is just because by the time we were leaving, is when we felt comfortable, why not we felt they felt comfortable. We're talking to us. And I'm really grateful for getting to that place with the people in Charleston and to see the differences in how people were responded to, you know, all of us, I felt like a major outside of all of us, we're still outsiders coming in asking people to share a traumatic experience

Unknown Speaker  2:24:23  
with us. And so that was really interesting to see those different.

Unknown Speaker  2:24:31  
So, continuing with that cloud of ownership of a project, that's really maybe not our story to tell,

Unknown Speaker  2:24:39  
which is something that I've

Unknown Speaker  2:24:41  
definitely thought about a lot with this project, and someone's really closely affiliated with the southern documentary project. And

Unknown Speaker  2:24:51  
it's so important that these stories get told. I mean, 894 students take an apartment in a day from the city values Every time I tell someone, they're like, Oh my god, I didn't know that. And I didn't know that until this project. So I storytellers I think if we're doing it right, eventually our job will be obsolete.

Unknown Speaker  2:25:14  
But someone's got to tell that story.

Unknown Speaker  2:25:27  
Well, before I was a part of the project, I didn't know anything about it. You know, when the race at that was fake, or at work, it was in 1970. And my grandmother would sue and it

Unknown Speaker  2:25:40  
was just like, Mississippi seem so spacey. Nobody's gonna make it seems like, you know, nobody really knows what's going on. But I did feel like a sense of ownership, like I needed to make sure that the stories were told correctly currently, but we just went in and out for ourselves in the space where they feel really comfortable and it was really the work was easy, easy to sue, because we did provide a safe space and people gave their dances they could some people weren't able to give their narratives because when they relive these mommy they were like these fields he for me so some people actually get down or have the origin stories. And it just really opened me up to what's going on in Mississippi or what happening CBD Mississippi is not know about the if we wanted to take more honest to be that that just gives us companies so I keep fighting for Mississippi to be a part of the recent or

Unknown Speaker  2:26:43  
or you

Unknown Speaker  2:26:44  
know, into the you know, moving along,

Unknown Speaker  2:26:48  
but open

Unknown Speaker  2:26:51  
my horizon.

Unknown Speaker  2:26:58  
I mean, it was Like I said before me, I felt like the least that we could do would be to like be able to listen and to be able to, you know, allow these people, different people to share, you know, their personal experiences with us. As kjar stated before there were some people who decided to come Atlanta maybe Of course I don't blame them though, but it was just so traumatic day. They just felt like they could not really talk about it. I will say so one day that I learned with actually worked on this documentary as it relates to networks. I had no idea first of all that there was even a black power movement. That was so

Unknown Speaker  2:27:46  
you know, background as it was at the University of Mississippi and when people typically

Unknown Speaker  2:27:53  
when I think about all this

Unknown Speaker  2:27:57  
you know, a lot of people talk about, you know, James, various But to speak and like as a student at the University of Mississippi, to know that there was so much more than just James Meredith was a pleasant surprise and even hear the stories about that the network of activism, you know, to hear that there were students from the University of Mississippi connecting with students from Mississippi Valley State, and all over the state was also just a pleasant surprise for me as a staff, someone coming up to me like a scholar, something that I hope to do some more research on definitely.

Unknown Speaker  2:28:43  
And this really relates to something that seems to be a theme that's that's gone through both the storytellers but I think the people who know you're telling your stories, this idea of trauma, and I think that was how the stories brothers had to get that that Trust. So often when we're trying to find stories in the south, I always say no prob, the silences, and very often and probing those silences is where we find that

Unknown Speaker  2:29:13  
trauma.

Unknown Speaker  2:29:14  
How over, you know, 50 years have you have each of you, King Dr. Cole kind of wrestled with that trauma?

Unknown Speaker  2:29:26  
Well, first of all, good years is a long time.

Unknown Speaker  2:29:35  
And

Unknown Speaker  2:29:39  
first of all, is just a recognition of

Unknown Speaker  2:29:45  
student protests.

Unknown Speaker  2:30:00  
politics at Harvard or could

Unknown Speaker  2:30:04  
come students don't come to college to do that come to college for something, something listen

Unknown Speaker  2:30:12  
to that game

Unknown Speaker  2:30:15  
over over time

Unknown Speaker  2:30:19  
and a good to reflect a little bit individual talk once again if you need to do something out that the garden and for good while I can talk about

Unknown Speaker  2:30:33  
I have come back to Mississippi, I hit be entered the University of

Unknown Speaker  2:30:39  
Mississippi

Unknown Speaker  2:30:42  
working on a degree and so I did

Unknown Speaker  2:30:46  
my previous activism to affect my degree. So if you will push a lot in the back of my mind. And, you know over time, just sort of had to Live with, but on a much, much larger scale.

Unknown Speaker  2:31:05  
Reflecting as all these individuals were talking and I'm asking ourselves why we appear? What's the purpose of

Unknown Speaker  2:31:14  
this?

Unknown Speaker  2:31:16  
Why is it that this information is gathered in a series? And for the people in the audience? I certainly appreciate you being here. And you're here because you care.

Unknown Speaker  2:31:32  
You here becomes

Unknown Speaker  2:31:35  
somebody margin law.

Unknown Speaker  2:31:38  
Do

Unknown Speaker  2:31:41  
you hear the counts?

Unknown Speaker  2:31:45  
When there is wrong in the world,

Unknown Speaker  2:31:49  
it takes you on the inside.

Unknown Speaker  2:31:53  
And that's what happened to students.

Unknown Speaker  2:31:59  
That's what happened. To me as a daddy at ego came to cost to have fun not to protest. But because of the situation. It failed my lot. And over the years since it is touch me on the inside

Unknown Speaker  2:32:24  
to the point that

Unknown Speaker  2:32:26  
if I see the panel, if I hear someone markula it moves me.

Unknown Speaker  2:32:38  
And that leaves a big realization that in the world that we live in, because that will always be the case. There will always be need for individuals to the one in the audience,

Unknown Speaker  2:32:52  
to the ones on state

Unknown Speaker  2:32:55  
to the one

Unknown Speaker  2:32:57  
so I just appreciate that Because

Unknown Speaker  2:33:05  
I struggle with

Unknown Speaker  2:33:07  
the experience

Unknown Speaker  2:33:09  
by continuously going to school

Unknown Speaker  2:33:14  
knowing that we were in a system

Unknown Speaker  2:33:18  
in Mississippi, in this country

Unknown Speaker  2:33:22  
that was trying to get you to function on a level of inferiority by under educating you in

Unknown Speaker  2:33:29  
a systematic way that moved me

Unknown Speaker  2:33:35  
so that when I left the valley,

Unknown Speaker  2:33:38  
I want to go and prepare myself as deeply as I could, in order to teach

Unknown Speaker  2:33:48  
other children

Unknown Speaker  2:33:50  
to be not the best that they could be. But the best that could be done,

Unknown Speaker  2:33:56  
because sometimes the past is down here,

Unknown Speaker  2:33:58  
and that's not good. But

Unknown Speaker  2:34:01  
to rate them higher so

Unknown Speaker  2:34:02  
that they can compete, compete internationally as well as national

Unknown Speaker  2:34:09  
have a high quality education.

Unknown Speaker  2:34:11  
So I went to

Unknown Speaker  2:34:14  
because one of the deals

Unknown Speaker  2:34:16  
that meant to the

Unknown Speaker  2:34:18  
protest was that we

Unknown Speaker  2:34:21  
wanted

Unknown Speaker  2:34:22  
the same quality

Unknown Speaker  2:34:25  
instruction at the valley. That was at Ole Miss Mississippi State

Unknown Speaker  2:34:31  
and the University of Southern Mississippi. That really irked me. Because we had during the summertime, we travel

Unknown Speaker  2:34:41  
and we talked to kids from Harvard, we talked to kid from Columbia

Unknown Speaker  2:34:43  
and

Unknown Speaker  2:34:44  
Yale, and we could see that they could, we could think just as well as they could, but we was under we had prepared.

Unknown Speaker  2:34:53  
Case in point. We are very sorry,

Unknown Speaker  2:34:57  
calculus teacher, and better That upset everybody, finally, have to be. So when I graduated, you know, they kicked me out for a semester. But I came back and I got my degree by George.

Unknown Speaker  2:35:12  
And then went to Mississippi State University and all the calculus that I was taking physical chemistry.

Unknown Speaker  2:35:21  
I knew my chemistry to know I'll be knowing my chemistry,

Unknown Speaker  2:35:27  
but no calculus and I was taking physical chemistry that was the calculus base.

Unknown Speaker  2:35:35  
I was on the course

Unknown Speaker  2:35:38  
becomes I was poorly prepared from a poor poor instruction at the bank and that need not to have been so.

Unknown Speaker  2:35:47  
So then I will divert from that point on, to go into the classroom. And to make sure that when I taught high school students chemistry and math that

Unknown Speaker  2:35:58  
they was going to leave Be the best. If they made a D, there be the best decision

Unknown Speaker  2:36:04  
in the world. That was

Unknown Speaker  2:36:06  
that's what I would tell them. So that's how I dealt

Unknown Speaker  2:36:10  
with trying to bridge the

Unknown Speaker  2:36:12  
gap. And to make sure kids were kept out of prison by being truly

Unknown Speaker  2:36:17  
prepared

Unknown Speaker  2:36:18  
academically to compete in on

Unknown Speaker  2:36:20  
the world stage, nationally and internationally. So my brothers

Unknown Speaker  2:36:26  
called me

Unknown Speaker  2:36:29  
because I was so afraid of not learning, the professional student as a family.

Unknown Speaker  2:36:37  
As David state school, let's

Unknown Speaker  2:36:38  
get to something here. So

Unknown Speaker  2:36:42  
let's do that. I

Unknown Speaker  2:36:44  
went to you. So you went to Cambridge and Harvard.

Unknown Speaker  2:36:46  
I did, too. I went to

Unknown Speaker  2:36:50  
every school in Mississippi,

Unknown Speaker  2:36:54  
said Oh, the

Unknown Speaker  2:36:58  
University of Mississippi now kosuna in Jackson, I was at Jackson State,

Unknown Speaker  2:37:04  
got the kill me.

Unknown Speaker  2:37:07  
I went

Unknown Speaker  2:37:10  
and went to Delta State.

Unknown Speaker  2:37:13  
Because,

Unknown Speaker  2:37:13  
you know, I was pushed from the trauma

Unknown Speaker  2:37:17  
of the demonstration and

Unknown Speaker  2:37:20  
nor Brian was demonstrating there to make sure that students was fully prepared.

Unknown Speaker  2:37:27  
Even though our spirit was, you know, we learned that the whole process

Unknown Speaker  2:37:31  
was to keep you on a mediocre basis

Unknown Speaker  2:37:35  
to have you to function

Unknown Speaker  2:37:36  
into think that you were inferior.

Unknown Speaker  2:37:40  
And I was that came out clearly during the protest. And I was determined not to let that

Unknown Speaker  2:37:47  
be a part of my fighter,

Unknown Speaker  2:37:49  
nor Let it be a part of invited fiber that talked.

Unknown Speaker  2:37:53  
So I talked for a purpose

Unknown Speaker  2:37:54  
and finally, my wife and I develop a school

Unknown Speaker  2:38:00  
And we do this thing is a private school that we make sure that when kids come out of there, they can pass in the state test that it's

Unknown Speaker  2:38:08  
given to them, you know,

Unknown Speaker  2:38:12  
the parent do deal with it.

Unknown Speaker  2:38:16  
I think there is that

Unknown Speaker  2:38:18  
there seems to be the people that identify with going through these protests. That is the way that they confront that trauma is through success. But one of the things that the thread that connects all of this is and with mass incarceration is how racism is baked into the system that created those protests that led you to rise up against them. That beats people into prison. So in the time we have left before we open this up for questions, I like all you to talk about what is it that from 50 years ago that really can relate to the way we The issues we are confronting now with mass incarceration. And what it was we learned from this project that we think we should be

Unknown Speaker  2:39:10  
putting out here in any

Unknown Speaker  2:39:15  
given about

Unknown Speaker  2:39:17  
two years ago.

Unknown Speaker  2:39:19  
St. Louis we were

Unknown Speaker  2:39:23  
outvoted approach

Unknown Speaker  2:39:27  
50 years ago.

Unknown Speaker  2:39:30  
We were genuine.

Unknown Speaker  2:39:35  
Two years ago.

Unknown Speaker  2:39:39  
We will noble in our car.

Unknown Speaker  2:39:44  
Fast forward now, though she's still the same priorities

Unknown Speaker  2:39:53  
and the causes are

Unknown Speaker  2:39:54  
still late.

Unknown Speaker  2:40:02  
They are going to

Unknown Speaker  2:40:04  
be people who are discriminated against. And as long as these practical holes, then the work from 15 years ago is a parabola as the work yesterday and so are the people.

Unknown Speaker  2:40:22  
Me on the panel of sorts.

Unknown Speaker  2:40:25  
So you are not as you are my professor,

Unknown Speaker  2:40:30  
Invisible Man this semester by Ralph Ellison and it just if there's any invisible men, it's the ones behind bars and sort of what can happen when they try to speak up is they're

Unknown Speaker  2:40:45  
put in a cage and locked up and thrown away the key and that still is the case today. I think when

Unknown Speaker  2:40:54  
you try to fight against the system which is so ingrained and personal intergenerationally

Unknown Speaker  2:41:08  
two years, two years.

Unknown Speaker  2:41:17  
I was 20

Unknown Speaker  2:41:18  
and 21 years ago, it

Unknown Speaker  2:41:22  
seemed like yesterday. But

Unknown Speaker  2:41:25  
as

Unknown Speaker  2:41:26  
that Paul was saying about the character of a

Unknown Speaker  2:41:31  
young pros back then, you know, we seem to be nervous

Unknown Speaker  2:41:35  
to age. But one thing that disturbed me now

Unknown Speaker  2:41:41  
is to come to this conference and to hear

Unknown Speaker  2:41:46  
the intelligence of the environment

Unknown Speaker  2:41:50  
and the activity that's going on. I have

Unknown Speaker  2:41:53  
been simply

Unknown Speaker  2:41:56  
profoundly

Unknown Speaker  2:41:57  
impressed with another Han, and

Unknown Speaker  2:42:02  
disappointed I often talk and have the conversation is that how can you have

Unknown Speaker  2:42:09  
more illiteracy

Unknown Speaker  2:42:10  
today than you had hit the year to

Unknown Speaker  2:42:16  
have that you can have

Unknown Speaker  2:42:18  
particularly in the black community, people reading kids reading or less on the graveyard

Unknown Speaker  2:42:25  
book that work the years ago so that there's only one answer to that institutionalized systemic systematic racism have been floated this country

Unknown Speaker  2:42:39  
for the purpose

Unknown Speaker  2:42:40  
of keeping people under educated

Unknown Speaker  2:42:42  
so we can take advantage of that. So the

Unknown Speaker  2:42:46  
struggle that is now going on

Unknown Speaker  2:42:49  
in parroted

Unknown Speaker  2:42:52  
and one reason why I stated this

Unknown Speaker  2:42:55  
and then

Unknown Speaker  2:42:56  
for the hardest man that said

Unknown Speaker  2:42:59  
that they great

Unknown Speaker  2:43:00  
equalizer

Unknown Speaker  2:43:02  
is education. You see no words, man, I don't see the comments that

Unknown Speaker  2:43:11  
must be

Unknown Speaker  2:43:13  
hard man

Unknown Speaker  2:43:14  
left out a particular element. You have to have quality, effective education

Unknown Speaker  2:43:22  
in order to be

Unknown Speaker  2:43:23  
the great equalizer, because we were getting

Unknown Speaker  2:43:26  
an education at Mississippi Valley State University. But it was not on the quality

Unknown Speaker  2:43:32  
that it needs to have been to participate in the upper echelons

Unknown Speaker  2:43:36  
of this great society that we now live in.

Unknown Speaker  2:43:40  
So it has to be impacted quality education that has to take place on every level. One other thing to

Unknown Speaker  2:43:49  
understand that

Unknown Speaker  2:43:52  
they look at the statistics and if a child cannot read on a third grade level wow Third grade, then they start

Unknown Speaker  2:44:01  
planning to build prison to accommodate him or her because they know that they're going to end

Unknown Speaker  2:44:08  
up in the penal system.

Unknown Speaker  2:44:10  
Now, that's what

Unknown Speaker  2:44:16  
determines what the prison population is going to be

Unknown Speaker  2:44:20  
10 or 20 years later, so that we have a system that does not

Unknown Speaker  2:44:26  
effectively teach children

Unknown Speaker  2:44:29  
and early age,

Unknown Speaker  2:44:31  
then you are building

Unknown Speaker  2:44:32  
an underclass that you can take advantage

Unknown Speaker  2:44:35  
of. And that's what I've been hearing to verify

Unknown Speaker  2:44:38  
all of those things from all that I've heard last

Unknown Speaker  2:44:41  
night, from what I've heard all day

Unknown Speaker  2:44:44  
today, that the reason why, you know you have so many people

Unknown Speaker  2:44:49  
in prison

Unknown Speaker  2:44:51  
is because this institutionalized effort to keep

Unknown Speaker  2:44:54  
people under educated to keep them functionally illiterate so you can make it better

Unknown Speaker  2:45:02  
And one other thing.

Unknown Speaker  2:45:04  
One other thing the police department

Unknown Speaker  2:45:08  
was created

Unknown Speaker  2:45:09  
to keep the rest to keep the upper 1% protected from

Unknown Speaker  2:45:13  
the rest of us, we must understand

Unknown Speaker  2:45:18  
is there to serve and to protect sound quiet No, but

Unknown Speaker  2:45:23  
is to serve and to protect that

Unknown Speaker  2:45:25  
upper 1%.

Unknown Speaker  2:45:27  
And the lower you go down that

Unknown Speaker  2:45:30  
they will beat your head into the ground. In the protection, you have to think

Unknown Speaker  2:45:34  
about those things. You know, and this is what this conference has taught me. The two days that

Unknown Speaker  2:45:41  
I've been here, I mean,

Unknown Speaker  2:45:43  
it's been so profound, I've been mesmerized,

Unknown Speaker  2:45:46  
but all by all the presentation that's been made, thank God for being here and giving some validity to

Unknown Speaker  2:45:53  
my my colleagues.

Unknown Speaker  2:46:01  
Questions.

Unknown Speaker  2:46:08  
Any questions if you want to come up?

Unknown Speaker  2:46:15  
meet you halfway.

Unknown Speaker  2:46:27  
Thank you,

Unknown Speaker  2:46:29  
Dr. Cole. I'm

Unknown Speaker  2:46:30  
Dr. kinema, a teacher in

Unknown Speaker  2:46:33  
Arizona and I recognize

Unknown Speaker  2:46:34  
your passion as having been a teacher and I'm glad to

Unknown Speaker  2:46:38  
see a Delta devil on the stage. And I am. My question is really for the young people on the stage. I've seen in the last

Unknown Speaker  2:46:45  
two days, the same common thread of education and the importance of reaching out to us that I

Unknown Speaker  2:46:52  
think kids say kids at age 16 year old kids get a bad rap these

Unknown Speaker  2:46:56  
days. I think

Unknown Speaker  2:46:59  
all that takes us to kind of give them a

Unknown Speaker  2:47:01  
little push or a tap. And then they get really enthusiastic about things. And so I'm wondering from the young people on the stage in light of what we heard from

Unknown Speaker  2:47:11  
our with Fox the other night about

Unknown Speaker  2:47:15  
coming to that moment where something happens to you and that switch is flipped and you can no longer go back to the way you thought before. I'm wondering from the people on the stage,

Unknown Speaker  2:47:23  
when the switch was flipped for you, and specifically since of high school teacher if those opportunities came to you and high school, or if they came afterwards.

Unknown Speaker  2:47:33  
And if they didn't come in high school.

Unknown Speaker  2:47:37  
Were really missing the boat. And that's just my perspective.

Unknown Speaker  2:47:39  
So I'd like I'd like to hear maybe from the people on the stage, but when that switch was flipped,

Unknown Speaker  2:47:46  
flipped was in when you start caring about school,

Unknown Speaker  2:47:49  
know about this stuff.

Unknown Speaker  2:47:51  
Like I think there's a real missed opportunity in K 12

Unknown Speaker  2:47:53  
education to

Unknown Speaker  2:47:54  
get young people turned on

Unknown Speaker  2:47:55  
to everything that we've been talking about the last couple of days.

Unknown Speaker  2:48:03  
Thank you for your question. So

Unknown Speaker  2:48:06  
I can talk about

Unknown Speaker  2:48:09  
I think it was inevitable for me

Unknown Speaker  2:48:13  
to start caring about these issues, but I don't know if I became like, truly radicalized until college like, now I'm like, leftist like global revolution, you know, like, like I'm yeah, education is like no like just destroy everything but

Unknown Speaker  2:48:34  
but I think

Unknown Speaker  2:48:37  
for me I think it was so much of it was rooted in you know I moved from Boston when I was seven and lived in Indiana done

Unknown Speaker  2:48:50  
i don't think i don't think it happened until college because I didn't realize that my whole education was a lie until college. It's like I remember think I've always cared and I think I, you know, being, you know, during the 2008 downturn when my dad lost his job, he was like, Oh, you're gonna have to leave the country, he doesn't find another one. So I always cared about issues with discrimination and but yeah, college under I remember going to like an intro African American Studies class and that first lecture being like, Oh, my God, everything has been a lot. I don't think we're getting that. I'm sorry. As I said, it would be disheartening to hear that and I think I had her I haven't really quality high school education. I'm really lucky. I went to Bronx science, which is like supposed to be, you know, one of the best, but it was very interesting. But also I don't think I had what is social studies? I don't know. What was that? Because like,

Unknown Speaker  2:49:49  
America now.

Unknown Speaker  2:49:52  
And even in New York, like when you know, when Osama bin Laden was killed people

Unknown Speaker  2:49:55  
like I'm sorry that your uncle died

Unknown Speaker  2:49:57  
and he's killed in Boston. So you know, I got so much Shit, right? I mean, New York City. Best one of the best high schools and I don't think, no, I'm sorry. But got there. Lucky.

Unknown Speaker  2:50:20  
I would say for me,

Unknown Speaker  2:50:22  
I'm a product of the public school system.

Unknown Speaker  2:50:26  
I have to be honest, you know, I can't really say that a guy that I was radicalized or that I really learned about, like the importance of, you know, building up your community and the struggles of people who have been marginalized. I didn't get that from high school either. I did get that however, from my family through through things that my family taught us specifically, especially my my maternal grandmother. Back in the 60s, she was a member of a union con xe She, you know, she felt she Mars when Dr. King came to make this unforgiveness. And so she's been involved in that. And as a kid, she was always giving me books about my black history about civil rights about life power. And as I got older, I started to read her old books from when she was in college. And so she was always calling me saying you need to watch this documentary or this movie about the the black experience about the experiences of these marginalized people. So I got that from my grandmother. Unfortunately, I didn't really get that from school. I just have to be honest. As

Unknown Speaker  2:51:44  
I'm trying to explain, and I've

Unknown Speaker  2:51:46  
been so focused,

Unknown Speaker  2:51:47  
and unlike

Unknown Speaker  2:51:49  
everybody else, I began a spouse who, what was going on in the world in middle school I had

Unknown Speaker  2:51:56  
a theater teacher is why we need to support arts

Unknown Speaker  2:51:59  
education.

Unknown Speaker  2:52:04  
She exposes

Unknown Speaker  2:52:05  
to everything. She gave us the space to like feel. Sorry, guys. She was like, we are friends in place and we were like, looking at each other crying for no reason. And she would. She had a psycho theatrical mama with a CD like Suzuki to let our fingers

Unknown Speaker  2:52:22  
out. It was really expressive. And

Unknown Speaker  2:52:26  
so I do have a better experience in education while in high school being exposed.

Unknown Speaker  2:52:38  
I think I started doing tearing when I was in the womb.

Unknown Speaker  2:52:44  
sandanista union rep. So

Unknown Speaker  2:52:49  
I've been in that environment when

Unknown Speaker  2:52:52  
we've been talking about how bad everything is. But I got really

Unknown Speaker  2:52:57  
radicalized when I was at a private school. A prep school in New Hampshire. And I saw the myth of meritocracy. It's absolutely not this education is not this great equalizer, this liberal notion, but it works really

Unknown Speaker  2:53:12  
to reproduce power

Unknown Speaker  2:53:14  
and seeing how that functions by the time you're 1418, and this in these places that are practical to Ivy League pipelines, and

Unknown Speaker  2:53:28  
so seeing that myth of meritocracy as also is very.

Unknown Speaker  2:53:32  
I started being really anti institutional and all the things but yeah.

Unknown Speaker  2:53:43  
So I have a question that's in the same vein.

Unknown Speaker  2:53:46  
I'm in from Wilmington, North Carolina, and thinking about 50 years

Unknown Speaker  2:53:52  
50 years ago

Unknown Speaker  2:53:53  
1971 we have Reverend Benjamin chavis and the Wilmington tenant

Unknown Speaker  2:53:58  
or restless political prisoners. In opposition to busing.

Unknown Speaker  2:54:03  
So the way that I sort of

Unknown Speaker  2:54:04  
began to think about busing, and public education in the United States

Unknown Speaker  2:54:09  
is just to

Unknown Speaker  2:54:11  
put it bluntly, I believe

Unknown Speaker  2:54:12  
that the educational program, United States Post 1970 is an incentive stock

Unknown Speaker  2:54:18  
of black education.

Unknown Speaker  2:54:20  
In North Carolina, only

Unknown Speaker  2:54:21  
three, Jim Crow high schools were made

Unknown Speaker  2:54:23  
to open as high schools after desegregation, if we can call it that.

Unknown Speaker  2:54:30  
So one of my questions is, given that black high schools during the Jim Crow period, particularly in the south, had a different orientation towards what good or effective education

Unknown Speaker  2:54:41  
was,

Unknown Speaker  2:54:42  
and that was completely erased from the public view. I'm wondering if the panelists

Unknown Speaker  2:54:49  
could describe what good education looks

Unknown Speaker  2:54:52  
like in your view,

Unknown Speaker  2:54:55  
and sort of how we can pursue and organize our community. need to have autonomy

Unknown Speaker  2:55:00  
over what those curricula look like,

Unknown Speaker  2:55:03  
in order to

Unknown Speaker  2:55:04  
sort of bring back some of the things that that I think were central to black high school education, pre 1968. Specifically, in terms of, I think Jim

Unknown Speaker  2:55:16  
Crow high schools, you can look at the word shaylen. Not only, for example, that high schools as

Unknown Speaker  2:55:22  
not only in education in the way that we think about education and liberal terms that I generally imagined it today,

Unknown Speaker  2:55:30  
but also in terms of spiritual production, political education, liberal organization and really, really a central place in the black community in order to

Unknown Speaker  2:55:46  
question

Unknown Speaker  2:55:53  
the truth of the matter is, when I'm glad he used the word desegregation. Cuz

Unknown Speaker  2:56:00  
there's more mechanical than integrated, and you really love each other. But this was a poor situation. Once desegregation took place, black count hated it. The parents hated it.

Unknown Speaker  2:56:17  
The children hated

Unknown Speaker  2:56:18  
and teachers hated it. Because teachers, my mom,

Unknown Speaker  2:56:24  
taught my radicalization. She will

Unknown Speaker  2:56:27  
be stone rather, my grandmother

Unknown Speaker  2:56:31  
was a stone rather, my grandmother

Unknown Speaker  2:56:33  
used to say this statement here.

Unknown Speaker  2:56:37  
Right folks, with sent out to school for three months, and gave us nine months to forget

Unknown Speaker  2:56:46  
where they went

Unknown Speaker  2:56:46  
to school and for nine months and just had three months to play. And I do remember saying that

Unknown Speaker  2:56:53  
right now. She

Unknown Speaker  2:56:54  
was born in 1891. Now let's go back sorry. But

Unknown Speaker  2:57:02  
when we when I was in school, it was all black. All Black school, everybody was happy. This is what took place. We knew

Unknown Speaker  2:57:11  
about our Black Heritage, become famous talk with these.

Unknown Speaker  2:57:17  
Then the culture was then you, the teachers were respected and thought that they were parents.

Unknown Speaker  2:57:25  
And they did two and a half local printers over you. If your parents spank your

Unknown Speaker  2:57:32  
butt that you can expect to teach us to do it with our inner Buffalo and final loss.

Unknown Speaker  2:57:39  
And then that comes our religious. We have Sunday school era Monday

Unknown Speaker  2:57:46  
morning over the PA and nobody complained about the ACLU did not come

Unknown Speaker  2:57:52  
in. They're telling us that we can pray. So that's the culture.

Unknown Speaker  2:57:57  
It was spiritually

Unknown Speaker  2:57:58  
as well as academics and Roshan and you felt comfortable with that.

Unknown Speaker  2:58:03  
But then when they integrated, okay my dad, my dad was the president.

Unknown Speaker  2:58:10  
My mother was has to be a teacher

Unknown Speaker  2:58:16  
when they integrated

Unknown Speaker  2:58:19  
they demoted my dad by promoted him.

Unknown Speaker  2:58:24  
What does that mean? They fit him away from the school

Unknown Speaker  2:58:27  
to be downtown. Just so he would not be over quite chewed.

Unknown Speaker  2:58:34  
And whereas the development in the south MIT corporal punishment I know you know them don't get them to them

Unknown Speaker  2:58:42  
and so then

Unknown Speaker  2:58:44  
but no black person was going to be allowed to chest as getting brighter.

Unknown Speaker  2:58:50  
And then the

Unknown Speaker  2:58:52  
the there was a hypersensitivity

Unknown Speaker  2:58:57  
you know

Unknown Speaker  2:59:00  
Quiet kids would stand up and say one thing integrated.

Unknown Speaker  2:59:05  
Why can't we say something

Unknown Speaker  2:59:07  
integrated?

Unknown Speaker  2:59:08  
I mean, it's insulting rather to a black and the black and if a

Unknown Speaker  2:59:14  
neighbor said to a girl, then I look like a boy when I'll take that. So during that year of 1971, is a great deal of social tension.

Unknown Speaker  2:59:26  
Nobody was happy anymore. So

Unknown Speaker  2:59:29  
because of going through the pains of desegregation, and to this very day, the black community has been weakened

Unknown Speaker  2:59:39  
because of desegregation.

Unknown Speaker  2:59:43  
They've been highly,

Unknown Speaker  2:59:44  
severely weakened, because you're taken out of your culture,

Unknown Speaker  2:59:49  
of discipline and instruction. And the other thing is to

Unknown Speaker  2:59:54  
we will tell

Unknown Speaker  2:59:56  
the black is the color of your skin should not hinder You, you you just did with the kids over there

Unknown Speaker  3:00:02  
are columns tab.

Unknown Speaker  3:00:05  
We could tell them that

Unknown Speaker  3:00:08  
when they were different when they

Unknown Speaker  3:00:10  
segregate, but you could go to that top like that cross town

Unknown Speaker  3:00:13  
when they integrate because you lose your job

Unknown Speaker  3:00:18  
because my mother didn't hear what she said.

Unknown Speaker  3:00:22  
She was deleted by the strip.

Unknown Speaker  3:00:24  
And they couldn't touch it. She just was a militant person.

Unknown Speaker  3:00:27  
And you might

Unknown Speaker  3:00:29  
want to know where I come from. I came from my mom,

Unknown Speaker  3:00:33  
and my grandma mom and my dad. He

Unknown Speaker  3:00:36  
was a strong man too, but he got hurt.

Unknown Speaker  3:00:50  
And this is my last comment. So

Unknown Speaker  3:00:55  
as well, you asked about schools and good schools and The efforts to box schools at the time and and what it takes to get a good education. And of course, it has to be knowledge based. First of all, you have to have someone there who keeps.

Unknown Speaker  3:01:18  
You will meet

Unknown Speaker  3:01:20  
someone there who believes in the individual to whom they're teaching.

Unknown Speaker  3:01:29  
And I have to conclude

Unknown Speaker  3:01:33  
with one of my favorite quotes about this meandering in here, but

Unknown Speaker  3:01:38  
I don't care

Unknown Speaker  3:01:39  
what the school looks like it can be integrated, can be black, you can be white,

Unknown Speaker  3:01:44  
but we have teachers

Unknown Speaker  3:01:48  
who work

Unknown Speaker  3:01:51  
back You don't need the money.

Unknown Speaker  3:01:54  
We have students and teachers who love likely never then

Unknown Speaker  3:02:01  
And it takes that child and teach them the things like nobody's watching.

Unknown Speaker  3:02:09  
You have good school.

Unknown Speaker  3:02:14  
So I think we have one more question. And this will do it. As a

Unknown Speaker  3:02:20  
native here in a product of public schools here, I'm deeply in the debt of the gentleman on stage. And I want to thank you for your courage and what you've done for this state and for education for all of us. And I want to say, listening to the range of ages on the stage, just how

Unknown Speaker  3:02:41  
striking it is. When y'all talk about where your consciousness got raised,

Unknown Speaker  3:02:48  
where you learn to think of your education, not just in purely instrumental terms, but in terms of what it's doing for humanity,

Unknown Speaker  3:02:57  
and it's as we were

Unknown Speaker  3:02:58  
hearing yesterday, That you talk about institutions

Unknown Speaker  3:03:01  
that have had sledgehammers taken to them politically, that there's a reason why they hate the union that your

Unknown Speaker  3:03:10  
mother grandmother was in because

Unknown Speaker  3:03:12  
it carries forward that tradition, right?

Unknown Speaker  3:03:14  
There's a reason why it was so important

Unknown Speaker  3:03:18  
to disrupt some of the community ties that were

Unknown Speaker  3:03:23  
intact, and got

Unknown Speaker  3:03:25  
dispersed through a process of

Unknown Speaker  3:03:27  
integration that had everything to do with with benefiting my education, and yours. And when

Unknown Speaker  3:03:35  
when I think about

Unknown Speaker  3:03:36  
the things you were all saying about the kind of

Unknown Speaker  3:03:39  
spiritual side of education that you received, and I hear about the University of Mississippi wanting to move to online education, or blowing up the class sizes so that you do not get

Unknown Speaker  3:03:53  
exposed to intellectuals like

Unknown Speaker  3:03:56  
the gentleman on the stage here. When you

Unknown Speaker  3:03:58  
hear about the constant push for technical education and for STEM fields and the attacks on things like ethnic studies that are the institutionalized reservoir of some of the kinds of more holistic education that you were

Unknown Speaker  3:04:15  
you,

Unknown Speaker  3:04:17  
gentlemen were raised in that you young ladies we're

Unknown Speaker  3:04:20  
getting from other directions. I just want to ask you where you see the resistance to those movements here in the state or

Unknown Speaker  3:04:30  
here in our educational system? How are people preserving that more holistic

Unknown Speaker  3:04:35  
view of what an education is for and who it's

Unknown Speaker  3:04:40  
for, as opposed to just turn it out good workers, for Google?

Unknown Speaker  3:04:47  
And thank you all.

Unknown Speaker  3:04:50  
Thank you for that for that question. And since our moderator graph has been kind of open to that question all the time. So we'll let you in by answering that question.

Unknown Speaker  3:05:07  
answer that question on?

Unknown Speaker  3:05:11  
Well, I think that's what one of the reasons I'm, I'm a graduate of university Mississippi, I never thought that I would be back here.

Unknown Speaker  3:05:19  
When I left, I said I was never coming back. But here I am. And I think the reason that I, that I'm

Unknown Speaker  3:05:26  
here and teaching in some studies is the cross disciplinary nature of the department where, you know, we can teach literature, but

Unknown Speaker  3:05:39  
also talk about

Unknown Speaker  3:05:41  
history in my students to do oral history, talking about food ways, anthropology.

Unknown Speaker  3:05:48  
So all these things really cross together.

Unknown Speaker  3:05:50  
And that's it for me. That's the trenches. So when I'm back in Washington, where I live, people say, Why do you teach a University City I say well, because I can teach things here that I can't teach anywhere else. And that's really important to me. And I think that's important to everyone who's here on the stage being places where we can teach things we can't do anywhere else. So thank you. I think we're at our time. So.

Unknown Speaker  3:06:26  
So as I mentioned, I just want to do a quick by February 25, of 2020, and will be the 50th anniversary of the arrest at the University of Mississippi. And we're doing an event infowar chapel where the rest took place, and inviting all of the students who are rested to come back and asking them what repair looks like to them. So for anyone who's from Mississippi or will be here, we hope you'll join us then. And I also want to thank Afton Thomas, if you noticed, she also did on narration. So in addition to everything else, she was wonderful. She

Unknown Speaker  3:06:58  
said that as well. Just think of

Unknown Speaker  3:07:01  
all the wonderful time. One more time you have another great 45 minutes to try and find food.

Transcribed by https://otter.ai
