Provost Noel Wilkin  0:09  
Good morning.

I know we still have people filtering in. But we do want to get started because I know the excellent lineup of speakers for the conference this morning and throughout the day and we don't want to get you off schedule.

Welcome to the making it a making mass incarceration conference and Good morning. My name is Noah Wilkins. And it is my honor to serve our faculty, our staff and our students as their provost. I'm also a professor in pharmacy administration department and a research professor in the research institute for pharmaceutical sciences. Welcome to the University of Mississippi and Welcome to Oxford. I bring greetings on behalf of our entire university administrative team. I know you're spending only a brief time on our campus and in our town, but my hope

Is that you'll come away with new insights, inspiration and appreciation for the amazing things that are happening both here on our campus in Oxford, but also in Mississippi. And that's not easy to say it No, that is not to say that there still isn't work to be done. Progress takes place through dialogue, conversation, engagement, and hard work. Dr. Felber, I appreciate the opportunity provide a welcome and I hope that you will indulge me to share just a few key concepts and perspectives with the conference attendees before I take my seat. Horace Mann between 1837 1848 is America's best known educator and he wrote a series of reports while he served on the school board of Massachusetts in report 12 and 1848, which is the same year that our university opened, he wrote, education then, beyond all other devices of human origin is the greatest lizer the conditions are met the balance wheel the silo machinery. It gives him each man the independence and the means by which he can resist the selfishness

of other men. This is

still the case today. It is not a political agenda. It is a social agenda. And I would argue it's a fundamental necessity in a civilized society. Our institution is committed to its educational mission, keeping it affordable, and building programs that increase students likelihood of success, and at the same time, we're fostering a culture of academic excellence. We do this through many programs that give people access to programs that will allow them to compete at the highest levels. Our Center for the Study of Southern culture, our Center for manufacturing excellence, our Center for intelligence security studies, our craft Institute, the language flagship programs in Chinese and Arabic, where our students are competing at the highest level and outperforming every other student in the United States. And I recognize and appreciate that none of this happens without faculty. While leaders may help shape vision and remove barriers, it's our faculty who advance the mission and stand in front of students every day to make this all possible. This commitment from faculty cannot be underestimated. And last night's keynote talk by Albert Woodfox and facilitated by Patrick Alexander Mr. Woodfox mentioned during the q amp a that one of the problems in society today is that we do not recognize people's different struggles that resonate with me because I believe we need to see and respect people as they are not do we want them to be? I believe that our ability to do this is hindered by the overgeneralization that plague social discourse today in the media, newspaper, and TV broadcasts. These are not helpful to our mission or any other of our side societal agendas. The inappropriate actions of one student doesn't make all students inappropriate. various actions what businessman doesn't make all businessmen bad actors, and one cannot infer the beliefs of all faculty based on the statements made by one single faculty member. This overuse of generalizations which overrides the focus on facts, and data stands as an obstacle to progress and reform on key issues. We need to focus society, policymakers, decision makers on the facts. And that's also why we're here. Many of you may be familiar with the fundamental and relevant facts that make this an important topic of discussion. facts that we should not forget include the US incarcerates more people than any other nation in the world. The prison population began in sharp growth in the 80s has been linked to the war on drugs. In 2003. we incarcerate 710 people for every 100,000 Americans in comparison, that same year 480 cases for every hundred Americans had cancer. Mississippi's rate

1039 incarcerated for every 100,000 people and Mississippi is a state surpassed only by Oklahoma and Louisiana and the number of people in prisons per capita. We know that incarceration of black and Latino men is disproportionately large compared to whites. Now some states like Texas are starting to make reforms and states have seen prison populations, racial disparities and the incarcerated and crime rates decline in response to the changes that they make. Higher Education plays an important role in this area. We must continue to generate and disseminate facts we must also continue sharing data to support the notion that reforms can achieve outcomes that are less expensive and more effective in decreasing crime rates. The data supports and warrants improvements and generalizations that crop every crime is the same or every person who is incarcerated the same works against reform. disavowing people generalizations and focusing people on facts should be innovative.

Finally, I'd like to thank our faculty for the work on the important issues that are relevant to this topic. I am constantly impressed as I make my way across campus and see the amazing things that our faculty and our students and our staff are doing. specifically to this topic. I'm impressed with the work on faculty and the issues at the individual level. For example, within our school of the laws Innocence Project run by Tucker Carrington, and the individual and system level by the MacArthur justice clinic run by Cliff Johnson, and within other academic departments and centers, like the Center for the Study of Southern culture, academic departments like sociology, anthropology, history and English, who are work to understand the issues call attention to the issues and pull people together to discuss those issues and work towards solutions. I'm also impressed with the work being done to educate empower those who are encouraged

Thank you for the opportunity to spend a little time with you, Dr. Felber, Dr. Wilkinson, and others who have played a role in planning this conference, that conference. Thank you to you and other conference organizers for your work and your commitment that you have to bring together people from various disciplines and perspectives to advance our understanding of this important societal problem, and more importantly, start to discuss solutions to improve it. As I close, will you please have all the people who played a role in today's conference please stand so we can give you a round of applause to thank you.

For that, I'll turn the lectern over to Dr. Felber.

Garrett Felber  8:13  
Morning

I want to thank Provost Noel Wilkin for those remarks and for his support of this conference, it's not lost upon me that having the support of the provost for a conference like this at the University of Mississippi is a big deal. So thank you to know for that.

Welcome to making and unmaking mass incarceration or what has become affectionately known over its long deviation is simply moving. I would like to take a moment at the outset here, just to bring people into the room who can't be

Unknown Speaker  8:47  
with us today, whom we love

Garrett Felber  8:49  
and care about many of us the reason that we're here, so if we could just take a moment to think about those people and bring them in. I appreciate that.

Thank you. So quite simply, I planned the conference that I wanted to see in the world. One where people from many disciplines came together around a clear mandate to organize and build a world without prisons, which pose limited barriers to participation for those who needed to be in the room and at the table. To do that requires thoughtfulness. But it also requires a hell of a lot of money and organizers. So that's who I'm going to thank right now. To my department, the arch arch Dalrymple's, the third Department of History. That was the initial seed money and support for this conference, the Center for the Study of Southern culture, the College of Liberal Arts, the Department of African American Studies and sociology and anthropology, the School of Law. No welcome in the Office of the Provost at the camera campus Lecture Series committee, the division of diversity and community engagement or outside grant money the land and foundation the laughing gold foundation Mississippi Humanities Council visit Oxford, the Southern Poverty Law Center forward us and Robert F. Kennedy human rights.

A particular thank you to Zoe Towns and Alesha Judkins and FWD.us who are a major supporter, but have also donated their expertise to web design to christen junior and put together a great website that we've redesigned 300 times.

But also I'd like to thank them and all the speakers who generously donated their honorarium so we could fully fund 43 travel grants. If we could just take them

to my co organizers, obviously it requires a tremendous amount of people to put something like this on. So thank you to Sydney, 30 Bernina and Kelly brown Houston for administrative support to our chair in a will Noel Wilson for her leadership to our graduate students to Martinez be Maurice Gibson, who has put together a volunteer team. Allison Cerise will be back at the same table which you should definitely check out. My colleagues in history Becky Marshall, Jesse Wilkerson, Jared roll to all the moderators William very Rhonda Williams, Rafi banks, Jeremy Skipper any Twitty? Kevin cozart for helping with design of the program. We add Cooper over at the foundation for helping do a million fun transfers that

Unknown Speaker  11:32  
I had no idea how to do.

Garrett Felber  11:36  
Thank you and an apology to ditcher Wiley who's out there at the front helping I left her off the program. So I have to publicly say I'm sorry for that. She's put in so much tremendous work. Elizabeth Hinton and Camille Muhammad for supporting this from the very early stages. Camille called me yesterday and said he wouldn't be able to make it. But I just want everyone to know how much of a supporter he's been at this from the very big Getting into Dan Berger, who I pretty much consulted on every single detail throughout this. And he's always just been a phone call away. So thanks, Dan. The Association of Black women historians and my colleagues here at Scott and Dan Bailey for sponsoring last night, happy hour, to Lindsey Dylan McGinnis and all the folks here at the lyric. Some of you may know we switched venues pretty last minute. So it's just incredible to have this space. Christopher for live streaming everything today also very last minute. And I'd like to close with three special thanks to some people who just put in a tremendous amount of work. Cam college student organizer and a friend of mine who just one day last week was at my house for 14 hours over a break just working on this. So thank you, Pam, and also always asking me how I'm doing, which I wish I had better answers for

Provost Noel Wilkin  12:58  
Thank you.

Garrett Felber  13:00  
Daiquiri Norman, who I've known since I was 18. And those of you who know me, does all the design work for everything I do. It's just tremendous, painstaking work. Again, the number of times that the schedule and list of speakers has changed every single time I have to call them and ask them to change it. And if you he's also taking photographs, you'll see him around. If you ever need design work done. I recommend that highly because not only does he get a good design, he understands and cares about the work and I think it's hard to find those two things. I don't believe oftentimes this here, I think she's getting some much needed rest. But if you see anything that is working at this conference is if you're eating food, if you're drinking coffee, if you're sitting in a chair, that's all laughed, and Thomas. Otherwise we'd all just be standing in hungry. So, so thank you for her friendship and strength and asking all the questions that I didn't know to ask. So now I'd like to just talk about what this what this thing is. It's probably clear to most of you, but this this conference is unapologetically abolitionist.

One non conference cannot indeed should not do everything. And there will be things that this does better than others. But I think we need to be clear at the outset that what abolition is, it is anti-capitalist. It is anti-racist. It centers black women, queer, and gender non conforming folks and directly impacted people.

It is a revolutionary ideology. If we think that we will eradicate the largest human caging project in history, without a socio economic, political, and perhaps most importantly, moral revolution, that we are killing ourselves. When people hear of prison abolition, they immediately jump to the physical structure of the President. They squint their eyes They try to bend their imagination and contract the world without razor wire, concrete walls and barn stoves. But what we lose when we focus on the physical structure is the deep political social structures, which nurture it from below. incarcerated people during the Black Power era have already theorized this. One political prisoner Martin, South Australia had a sentence commuted after spending nearly a decade in solitary confinement. He said he was simply moving from maximum security prison to minimum security, America. The prison exists on a long continuum of unfreedom, that is centuries long, only the most recent iteration of a gender and racial control of a system we can best understand through the late Cedric Robinson's turns as racial capitalism, the idea that capitalism emerged as a fundamentally racist and gender ratio. We can see this most clearly through the first abolition of chattel slavery. Despite the legal end of human chattel and the absence of eradicating racial capitalism, the system which produced it, slavery was reproduced almost overnight in the form of compact leasing, for example, is to leave in the Florida and notice the convict leasing replace black women's reproductive labor with their productive conviction rather than conception supply its workforce. So if we do not dismantle the underlying structures of which prisons and police are simply manifestations, we will certainly create newer, crueler more efficient forms of punishment. Since many of us are housed at universities, even if we do not call them home, I'd like to focus my remarks on our host the University of Mississippi. I'd like to take us on a brief virtual tour of our campus and orientation of sorts, through the lens of unfreedom and gender racial violence. What can its physical structures, tell us about this? systems which produced and continue to maintain that if these structures could speak, and we would listen, what stories would they tell us about the movements we need to create?

So we'll begin with the Confederate statue. If you know anything about our university, you likely know that the name Ole Miss is a reference to a woman in slavery, and that we have a prominent monument to white supremacy, which sits at the main entrance of our campus.

When the University of Mississippi opened its doors in 1848. Like most universities of the 19th century, it was dedicated to consolidating intergenerational wealth amongst a handful of white men. But it was also an open air prison. The University of Mississippi slavery Research Group, which includes faculty across 17 departments on campus estimated that 118 people were enslaved on campus by 1866 faculty and human challenge. That same year in Barnard observatory, the building where art exhibit is being held on campus and enslaved woman named Jane, owned by Chancellor Frederick Barnard was sexually assaulted by a student. This labor research group has identified over dozens of accounts of beatings and violence against enslaved workers on our campus. And around the circle over which the Confederate statue now stands, there would have been at least three enslaved corners. The group even suspects the grounds of one cabin may not be more than 100 yards from the statue.

If we were to transition from the history of slavery, to what has been called slavery by another name, convict leasing and the rise of the penal farm, you would need to only travel in the Northwest a third of a mile. There Jason are African American Studies Department is farming all. Despite being slated for renaming in 2017. The building named after former Mississippi governor James Bartman, who campaigned under the banner of vote for parliament is a vote for white supremacy, still bears his name. Bartman was not only a proponent of lynching, and an enemy of black education, he was also an architect of parchman farm. The so called Great White chief was a vocal opponent of the convict leasing system, but not on moral grounds, rather because it served the planter class, and he was a white supremacist populist who appealed to poor whites. Not coincidentally, after vitamin personally supervise the draining of the land and the planting of thousands of acres of cotton. The prison also produced the state profit of $185,000 in his first year which would be 5.4 million in today's dollars. parchman was more than that. He was also vitamins sporting grounds. As David O schinsky recounts, the governor enjoyed a mock hunt, where a prisoner was given a morning's Head Start before they released bloodhounds and began hunting him. After the person was caught, they retire for a picnic lunch or the man ate off to the side.

If we fast forward to February of 1970, all two coats and other black women students at the University of Mississippi sat in jail cells at parchman, two and a half hours from Oxford. By then jailene a parchment had become almost a rite of passage for civil rights workers and a matter of habit for police in Mississippi. This story begins at Fulton chapel, Western Parliament Hall, a classic Revival style building constructed in 1927 by 1972 In the midst of the Black Power movement, the number of students enrolled at this university had just surpassed 100. Although the story of integration at the university often begins and ends with James Meredith nearly 200 black students began that year, with a recently formed Black Student Union and dreams of a place which belong to them. As student organizing and unrest group, J. Edgar Hoover encouraged local FBI agents to work with campus police and cultivate an informant within the BSU. After its 30 demands were ignored by the Chancellor students disrupted a concert at Fulton chapel and gave the Black Power salute onstage. Upon exiting the auditorium, they were met by state police and 90 students representing almost half of the entire student black student body were arrested and many of them taking department to intimidate student activist eight of them were expelled, one of whom Dr. Whole you'll hear from at this conference, and the rest were put on 10 years probation. conversations about reparations and the university often focused on chattel slavery. But they must also extend far beyond. In the expulsion hearings from 1970. Students repeatedly freeing their outraged through the language of reparations, back payment entitlement to what was justly there's album was paid and said if I can come to an institution, mine institution where this type of education can be given to me than once they use. My parents have been paying for it all along and until 1962. They were paying for whites to go to school. JOHN Donald added my tax money is up here. My parents tax money is up here. And so why shouldn't I enjoy what is rightfully mine? So I'd like to end our tour actually where we were originally slated to be hosting this conference, the overview Center for the Study of Southern journalism and politics and I'm going to abide by the greatest journalist the South has ever produced. Ida B. Wells, who urged us that the right the way to right wrongs is to turn the light of truth upon. In 2001, Charles Overby, who had been the editor of the student paper at the University of Mississippi just a year before that, VSU protests began in 1969 became the namesake for a new center on our campus. The Center was established with a $5 million gift from the Freedom Forum, a group which over be served as chairman and CEO. Freedom forums guiding principles are free speech, free press and free spirit. As you can see, inscribed in the middle of the overview center. It is dedicated to the education and maintenance of the First Amendment. But that same year in 2001, Overby also became the director of the board of CCA the correct Corporation of America, now rebranded as core civic, the second largest private prison company in the nation. Since then, overbeat has received an annual salary and stock options from core civic, and his current shares in the company are nearing nearing one and a half million dollars, and he has sold over a half million dollars and stocks. As prison legal news points out quote Charles Overby is a man who needs dual lives. A man who is each foot planted firmly in two very different worlds. In one, he is the champion of the Free Press, and the other he is one of a group at the helm of a corporation that has worked hard to limit Freedom of Information and the ability of the press to inform the public for not only his core civic, behemoth and private prisons, but it also successfully lobbied against the private prison Information Act of 2007, which would have made private prisons open to Freedom of Information requests. As many of you You know, this August Morton, Mississippi was the site of the largest immigration rate in a single state and ever, with 680 workers arrested. Many of them were taken to Adams County, a private prison and Natchez owned and operated by core civic. A month later. The prison was given a new five year contract with ice, claiming it would add 50 new jobs and boost kaduk revenue as Adams County receives 50 cents per person incarcerated in prison each day.

Now, I should stress as many here you know and have the private prisons are not the primary drivers of mass incarceration. They represent 8% of the pie. They are fundamentally parasitic. But if the private prison is a parasite and not a driver, the university is both. It drives incarceration, your exclusionary employment and admissions, university policing by gentrifying neighbors hoods, investing in private prison companies cooperating with ice, the FBI, DEA and other law enforcement and by developing technologies and epistemologies of violence through its research and curriculum. It is parasitic by offering tax shelters to racist elites and contracting with Aramark and other companies who profit from incarceration. I do not want to suggest the University of Mississippi to somehow exceptional it's not or that the university as an institution is unique. It's not. What I want to suggest is that the prison is an organizer of our social, political and economic relationships and a manifestation of racial capitalism and gender racial bias. So we cannot sit about and single out a single particular institution, but we need to think about our various places within the movement. Justice Audrey Lord wisely caution that there is no such thing as a single issue struggle because we all we do not think it's single issue lives. This is not a single issue system. We must engage in what Barbara randsburg calls political quilting, stitching together the various pieces of our movement into a new community of struggle, justice and love. And when thinking about abolition, we need to center people in prisons, not the prisons themselves. So making a non making mass incarceration is about telling histories, which advanced our collective capacity to reimagine a world without prisons or police. If we must understand our past and our current challenges, we will build new forms of surveillance and punishment in the name of bigger and better new. If we focus on the prison structure, and not the structures which undergird it will continue the long line of reforms which gave birth to the prison itself. We do not need to look elsewhere to say Scandinavia, for better models, prisons. We need to look elsewhere in our own history for better models of liberation. I hope over the next several days, you'll develop relationships, think dialectically build community. And as Grace Lee Boggs would say, grow yourselves. Thank you so much.

Unknown Speaker  28:34  
We have a participatory

Garrett Felber  28:35  
element of this because we're trying to get over these private prison money off our campus. So cam palace is going to come up here and give you a little task. You can do it online, you can just sit there and tweet. So cam once you come up and share what some of the students are doing. Thank you.

Cam  29:01  
Morning everyone.

#CharlesOverby and #UMPrivatePrisons with an "s." So basically coming at it from whatever angle could like leaking into the violence of the Mississippi raids, talking about institutional violence and how this isn't necessarily unique, but kind of using this. Yeah, you know, be poetic with it. But this is a really great opportunity for us to educate more of our peers and also as a critique of academia in general. Okay, that's really all I had to say. Does anyone have any questions? Yeah.

Okay, #CharlesOverby and #UMPrivatePrisons with with an "s" at the end.

Provost Noel Wilkin  30:54  
That would be a really good idea. Thank you.

Cam  31:17  
Yeah, that's a really good idea.

Yeah, so if you could retweet and also if you have the mental capacity to like, create us. Yeah, like whatever you want to do. It's early in the morning

Garrett Felber  32:01  
While Kim is doing that I have another I don't know if it's more unsavory since we're talking about private prisons, but another announcement so someone driving a white suburban or is a white suburban is parked outside and someone while parking is scraped it and want to take care of that with the person right now. So that person apologies to wherever that is. The license plate is http 3830. It's a New York plate. White, not white, super white, super green.

Unknown Speaker  32:30  
Okay.

Cam  32:43  
Okay, anything else? Any other questions? I was really good critique. Yeah, it was good. Okay. All right, you know for yourself. Thank you so much.

Anne Twitty  33:13  
Good morning.

My name is Anne Twitty. And I have the absolute pleasure of chairing this very first lead off panel at this amazing conference. And I have to say, Kim Kim mentioned this a second ago. It has been truly amazing to watch my my colleague and friend Gary Halbert work to put this conference together. And I have to say from the inside, looking out, what he's done has been absolutely tremendous to bring so many of you here to raise absurd amounts of money, especially from an academic standpoint. He's just done a terrific work. And we've all been so incredibly impressed and we're also excited that you're joining us here today so another round of applause for Gareth and and his herculean efforts.

So as I mentioned, my name is Angela and I mentioned that the gear is my colleague I teach here at the University of Mississippi and I'm going to be chairing this leadoff panel on the legacies of slavery before we get going without a couple of announcements, and that is specifically that I'm going to be leading a campus slavery tour at 9am on Saturday, so for those of you who have later flights want to learn a little bit more about the history of slavery and enslaved people on our campus, I would be really, really thrilled to have you join me we're going to be meeting on the life steam steps facing the circle.

Oh, fantastic. Our fourth panelist, there's always a bunch of logistics to work out when when when you start off one of these conferences, so we're always Here, make sure that if you are interested in joining us, that that you meet up with us on 9am on lycium steps face in the circle to learn a little bit more about the history of slavery and it's like people on university Mississippi's campus. So we have four tremendous panelists today and they're going to make some brief remarks, I may ask a couple of questions, or depending on how we're doing on time, I may just throw the floor open to you and get out of the way. So our first panelist today is Deon Bailey and Dr. Bailey is a visiting assistant professor of history at Colgate University. But before heading to Colgate she was a postdoctoral fellow at Carter G. Woodson Institute for African American and African Studies at the University of Virginia. And before that, she was an outstanding masters and doctoral student here at the University of Mississippi, where she earned both of those degrees and we are absolutely thrilled to have your back. Dan specializes in the study of African American women social injustice and the history of mass incarceration in the American Civil She's currently working on her first manuscript project Daughters of Jim prose injustice, African American women mass incarceration and the business of black women's bodies in the American South 1890 to 1980. Dion is also the founder of the nonprofit organization eyebrow, which stands for I am the voice of women that works to aid and empower women in their transition from the penal system back into society and emphasis on education, mentoring and support while also serving as an advocacy organization that seeks to aid women currently entangled in the penal system. Our second panelist today is Max mishler. max received his PhD from New York University in 2016, and is currently an assistant professor of history at the University of Toronto that specializes in the transnational History of the United States with a focus on slavery, abolition, incarceration, and the history of capitalism. His current book project entitled civil slavery, punishment, abolition and the origins of mass incarceration. explores the entwined histories of slave emancipation and penal servitude in the Atlantic world. This research has been supported by a variety of different organizations including the Social Sciences Research Council, the Council of library information resources, the McNeil center for early American Studies at the University of Pennsylvania. He's also broadly interested in public humanities, particularly developing educational programs for currently and formerly incarcerated people. Our third panelist today is Walter Johnson, winter professor of history and African American Studies at Harvard University. And he's easily one of the most influential historians working on slavery today. Johnson earned his bachelor's degree at Amherst College, completed his graduate work at Princeton under the direction of Mel painter, and taught history and American Studies at NYU before moving in 2006 to Harvard, Professor Johnson, his first book sold by sold life inside the antebellum slave marketplaces norlin slave and the domestic slave trade at the heart of both the institution and through region convincingly demonstrated that the history of the antebellum South is the history of 2 million slaves sales. His second book river of dark dreams slavery and Empire in the cotton Kingdom castle the Lower Mississippi River Valley as a site of global trade and commerce, the transform the region's ecology and permeate day to day experiences of the 10s of thousands of enslaved people who made the cotton Kingdom possible. his new book, which is currently available for pre order, and will be released in April of 2020 is called the Broken Heart of America, St. Louis and the violent History of the United States. It examines the central role of St. Louis and the imperialist and racial capitalist History of the United States from Lewis and Clark, to Michael Brown. Our final panelist today is a manisa warrior. She's a writer, founder of the site swari m i.org, coordinator of the right to vote campaign and a 2019 civil rights fellow with the Roddenberry foundation. She graduated from the University of Washington with her bachelor's degree in both media Communication Studies and law, economics and public policy in 2016. provisionary publications, aid and distributing messages and building community among participants in the prison resistance movement on both sides of the wall. During the aftermath of the leak county massacre that occurred in South Carolina's department of corrections, swore selected by jailhouse lawyer speak to be the spokesperson for the 2018 National prison strike. Her coordination of over 400 endorsing businesses groups and organizations led to the successful participation of incarcerated activists in 17 states and three regions abroad. In addition to organizing right to vote sorries organizing the statewide campaign to end truth in sentencing laws and bring back good time in Michigan. Today, stories monthly right to vote report is mailed to hundreds of prisoners in 27 states across the country. Please join me in welcoming our terrific panel.

Unknown Speaker  40:15  
Good morning.

Unknown Speaker  40:19  
So good to see everyone here.

Unknown Speaker  40:26  
So I'm going to start off by telling a little story. Okay, and then we'll sort of contextualize the story. We think about writing I write specifically about black girls and women at parchman prison and talk a little bit about partial opening. And so I want to sort of expand that this morning. And an article published on sep tember the 14 1896 in the towns democrat New Orleans a newspaper out of the worland. Louisiana, the headlines rated candidate. Number 262. Heavy record the nine year old murderers. The short but intriguing tale of any record related to the Mississippi justice system or ingest system. At the end of the 19th century, is only one small deployment story that reveals the importance of black girls and women's bodies during the imprisonment and in freedom. In 1896, the state of Mississippi convicted nine year old heady record of how springs Mississippi of the murder of one of her two infants, two infants that were lived in the childcare, the few newspapers who ran the story with sensationalize the account even going as far as printing that record killed her baby Sister with an axe. accused mainly due to her own testimony of brutally striking the infant in the back of the head with an axe and grabbing her by the foot and dragging her across the woods record explained that she would then cover the infant will believes try before what Jerry When asked if she killed in hit because she did not want to nurse her record responded No sir I killed her cuz cuz she hollered so much because I didn't want to nurse the babies anymore. Record became the youngest person in the state of Mississippi by two years. So there's another young girl who's a liquid to ever be combined of the charge of murder or manslaughter, as most children had previously been sent to the State Penitentiary, but that even when considering the fact that records questionable testimony, at nine years old was used to condemn you Sort of as a condemning mechanism that criminalized and sealed her fate. What is clear is that Mississippi and his judicial system understood the possibilities in the very near future of just how profitable hitting record would be in helping the state rebuild his economy after the Civil War. The stage sure that record had committed this at argue that as a form of leniency, then that they would charge her with manslaughter provided that conviction, and that was what was best for the little darky. Records conviction meant that she would spend five years jail in the state penitentiary located in Jackson, Mississippi, and would be 14 years old when parchman opened its doors in 1991 and welcomed her to her new home in the late 19th century, other than an insane asylum Mississippi did not have a house of intention for girls or women wants to stay move to rewrite their state constitution and 1990 specific language app on the move to a state penitentiary that will function as a came a farm. And right it would mirror the form of an old Southern plantation. It would be through this guy's that hitting record so hard, just how unjust Mississippi would and could be, even for a young girl, who would be forced into adulthood almost immediately unsure any further circumstances concerning records imprisonment, it is clear that the Mississippi judicial system felt that a lengthy prison sentence for a nine year old African American little girl was warranted after having served close to 10 years of her sentence. The story of any record took a stunning time a white judge and his business partner, a plantation owner wrote a series of partner clemency request to the governor requesting a party for not only record, but also other imprisoned African American girls and women. the motives of the judge and the planter speak to larger issues surrounding the value that White's placed on black girls and women's bodies and their primary interest in record

Garrett Felber  45:26  
light in the value of

Unknown Speaker  45:28  
her labor. their interest, their interest in records, labor was in their minds, an extension of the plantation economy. We're in the south under the system of slavery, white men and even possibly, those two white men had exploited in slave women through both their laboring and sexualized bodies with no consequences

Cam  45:55  
by the late 19th

Unknown Speaker  45:56  
and early, early 20th century and using mechanism spawn around criminalization and imprisonment, white men could and did enact the same form of exploitation with very few social or political ramifications. And in the case of record, these two white men sought to use the carceral state, and more specifically parchman penitentiary to aid in and legitimize their efforts to extract her labor to enrich their lives. So between 1970 and 1960, thousands of African American boys men, girls and women enter the harsh realities of a state penitentiary, who's very fabric, and then it not only the aroma of slavery, but mirrored it to a tee. Mississippi's penitentiary danis historian David ocean ski explained in his important work on parchman farm was undoubtedly worse. slavery, Jim Crow laws, penal codes and racially biased groups especially targeted African Americans during this region's massive incarceration of Southern blacks following reconstruction. throughout the south during the late 1860s, and 1870s, organizations such as the Knights of black chameleon, the pill faces White Brotherhood, the KKK, they all flourished in the south and it was these organizations that terrorized African Americans and exercise complete power over black citizens. By the end of reconstruction, Southern States began to pass laws that explicitly restricted the freedom of African Americans. For example, the state of Mississippi, the legislature passed one of the songs first came from a poem that says prohibiting African Americans from riding in railroad coaches Ryan said it's time for wise, Mississippi also passing tourists pig loss which lowered the dollar amount What constitutes a grand larceny and offense punishable by up to five years in prison for $25 to 10 down to $10. more severe steal the bomb prohibited the stealing any half paid, shot shot cow calf steer bull sheep lamb Lambo, any kind of Rise of the value of one or more dollar would be punished as grand larceny and does punishable up to 10 to 15 years in the state penitentiary. So here's where we get mixed into right? This this needing wanting parchman this lot man in particular was blatantly racist, as it was always presumed that, that that especially cattle on Swan were typical black defenses. And in Mississippi, most of them a lot. The livestock was owned by wives. So black girls and women then would be charged and convicted of grand larceny insaneness to the State Penitentiary. So I'm incarcerated black Mississippi and serve sentences and county jails. And the State Penitentiary in Jackson, what's open not to no one partially painted farm house most of those in prison, incarcerated girls, boys, men and women worked at the penal farm and provided the penitentiary with the cheap and abundant labor force. This labor was so vital to the state that the first year scared spoke to this parchman turned a profit for the state. So now this is where we know by the state understands they are in business with this parchman was in big business and in this case, the burgeoning business was also black girls and women's bodies we can't forget most people focus on black boys and men. We have to understand right that black women and girls they weren't there when Carson opened their doors. As white Mississippians talk to control the labor of white girls on women black these particularly right there Black girls and women sits squarely at the intersection of race, gender, and the political economy regarding black women's relationship to the state, the economy and their communities. Once labeled as criminal or offender, these titles castigated black female sexuality in the south as their behaviors post behavior link crime team immoral sexuality, history, story and plot Nolan noted that one Southern planter wholeheartedly believe in this quote, you can't find the white streak and if you turn wrong side outputs and back again, all the manor thieves all the women are prostitutes

Unknown Speaker  50:45  
is their nature to be that way. And there never been no other way in quote. Does African American girls and women wants Dean deviants fail outside of normal social acceptance incarcerated girls Women became called a pariah class separate and distinct from the ideal chasse and morally correct. Women in the Victorian era, the Victorian principles created a standard for which women would ultimately be viewed and judged. And as numbers indicate, however, in Mississippi, and at the beginning of the 20th century, there were almost no incarcerated girls or women

Unknown Speaker  51:27  
who were one.

Unknown Speaker  51:29  
For example, by 1981, the state of Mississippi had 23 African American girls and women entangled in the prison system, and only one white woman and they just right she just was all over to the side, right? They sort of never really wanted to talk about her. And this was under right the form of control that I'm speaking to. So I'm Mississippi as another southern states that began to develop their penal systems model after plantations, a strong belief and punishment exceeded most others. concerns such as forgiveness or rehabilitation. Administrators men and Simon often center on the labor of those incarcerated and the profit each individual help turn in board the state. incarcerated people women particularly played a major role and not only helping partners to stand itself, but also turning this major profit and as part part of parchments Bible labor force, the work of incarcerated women play a crucial role in the daily operations of the penal our concerns regarding the release of those in prison closely followed deliberations of what should happen to persons incarcerated in the state penitentiary, putting the tank African Americans to work in a in the penal penal farm and tying the profit took precedence over anything else. And they welcome right the side didn't matter to them. They could under stand seeing black girls and women ride in bondage. So here is where the story of hitting record illustrates just how important her labor was to the state as well to private citizens interested in her free labor, by the age of 18 record was close to having served the 10 years sentence at parchman. Surely that I feel this she felt like her freedom was upon her Shin that we knew that gentlemen had a little over maybe a year to serve. And then she would hopefully have the opportunity to see what lies ahead of her would be live what if what would it feel like right? Surely we must imagine that she was excited. We have to imagine this. We must hope that it is so because we will never really truly know because record never had an opportunity. Need to speak for herself. instead. Instead, those two white men I mentioned earlier judged on the be fuel, and his business partner Josh, Judge GB Hawthorne, sought clemency for young record, which represented in a literal and figurative sense the collusion of the white elite and the state. The EX the exercise of state power to protect that mask and reinforce the financial interests, political power and social status of white landowners and power brokers in Mississippi was key. Having the gun requesting clemency and party for record for two years. Both men incomes view record as a domestic labor as a person who could feel a void left to their family sensibilities as the white ruling class, both man's family's histories, tats and the destitution of slavery. They want everything Record for that purpose, a semblance of time pass. It is unclear what then happened to record are these requests per month provide rock proof fruitful for the two men interested and invested in her labor. They're writing letters to the governor so they're invested in this. We do not see record in the census listens and not to 20s and subsequently, she's listed as a webinars. The very thing that as a young nine year old girl she had no want or need to be. It is possible that she served her 10 year sentence to find herself released to these two white men or another white family to work and perform domestic duties as a young 19 year old African American woman. What is clear, also is that the legacy of slavery not only in Mississippi but also in the south, predicated upon the right laws, gender and class nature of the criminal justice system. And the burgeoning prison industrial complex, rested particularly in the network of interests and institutions that profit from the imprisonment of people of color and the poor. It is here where we see the first syllabuses and the development of Max incarceration,

Unknown Speaker  56:24  
not in the 1980s as an institution building upon the backs of not only African American boys and men, but also through the labored physical and mental exploitation of African American girls and women, penalized and criminalized in southern states, including Mississippi who sought to rise out of reconstruction and rebuild their economies through this very system.

Unknown Speaker  56:54  
incarcerated black

Garrett Felber  56:55  
girls and women then

Unknown Speaker  56:57  
wear and continue to be The business in the creation and implementation of the prison industrial complex, profitable and imperative for state. Thank you

Unknown Speaker  57:30  
unenviable task of following that and proceeding Walter Johnson. So

Unknown Speaker  57:41  
want to first say thank you. Thank you to Gary was a colleague and a friend, a comrade and someone who to be frame help show me that To was an abolitionist, sometimes we think we go to events like this, you're already supposed to be one or know what it is. But sometimes we become one. And Gary was pretty instrumental in helping me become one by showing me that the work that I'm interested in doing is not antithetical to abolition and part of it. so thankful for that.

Unknown Speaker  58:25  
Right. I want to thank also everyone else who made this conference possible for getting us here. getting me out of the Northeast, is very important.

Unknown Speaker  58:38  
And, and, and, and series and I think it is important that we think about these conversations taking place outside of the traditional areas of mass incarceration is a national phenomenon. With national origins and national iterations. We need to sort of move the conversation beyond certainly the academic conversation beyond traditional locations. I'm also very sympathetic with the framing of this conference, the making of mass incarceration, and the unmaking of mass incarceration to suggest that we need to not only study how we got here, but the studying how we got here implies a political obligation to undo it. Right. And to unmake mass incarceration is not simply as a reference, sort of thinking about counting numbers of prisons. It's about building a society where mass incarceration will never again be possible.

Unknown Speaker  59:36  
And stop very sympathetic with the aims of this conference.

Unknown Speaker  59:41  
I want to my talk today is not really a talk so much as a set of questions. I'm trying to want to engage with the title of this panel, legacies of slavery. So I want to ask a series of questions. I want to put out a few hypotheses, which people may like right Not like, and we can have a conversation about it. But these aren't truisms so much as questions that I wrestle with. And I think we should all wrestle. Want to start, as I usually do with web two boys, I just lectured this week on reconstruction and use black reconstruction extensively. And I want to start with a very well known sentence from that book, that is in looking back a reconstruction from the 1930s. Dubois says, quote, The slave when free, stood a brief, brief moment in the sun, and then move back again towards slavery. And I was thinking about that quote,

p3  1:00:40  
in terms of today's panel,

Unknown Speaker  1:00:43  
and one of the things that struck me is that he's speaking of a specific historical moment of process, but I wonder if there's something even deeper there, which is to think about the moving again towards slavery as a horizon of possibility, a negative horizon of possibility. The one that lasted Well, after reconstruction, one in which we're still living, this move back towards slavery, and the moment in the sun as an alternative, alternative horizon of possibility, the abolition horizon of possibility. And then one of the things we have to do as historians and activists is to think about how, how do we not only understand those brief moments in the sun when they happen, how are they built? How do they succeed? Where do they fall? Where do they falter? And then how has that Marsh back towards slavery? How has that shown up in different places and towns?

Unknown Speaker  1:01:42  
So one of the things I'm going to sort of say today is

Unknown Speaker  1:01:47  
I want us to think about the phrase legacies of slavery as a question not a statement. That is his mass incarceration, a legacy of slavery and to ask it as a Question is not to say that it isn't. So we just heard an incredible talk that shows the resonances and the ways in which one precipitates the other and bleeds into the other. If you want to read I think in some ways, one of the best historical considerations of those you should read Walters book River of Dreams, chapter six, parcel the landscape, which does a lot of thinking through these questions. But I want to think about a question wants to think about mass incarceration, the legacies of slavery as a question. And in particular, what I would suggest is, there's a way in which mass incarceration is a legacy of slavery, obviously, but there's also important ways in which mass incarceration was to be blind, a legacy of freedom, a legacy of the ways in which freedom was conceptualized and implemented, and the ways in which freedom was undefined. What was a freedom? What did it mean? What would it mean for people who got to determine what it was? What was the relationship between freedom and capitalism? What role did coercion play in freedom? There's a whole set of questions. They get either unasked or unanswered. And I think that one countries in genealogy and mass incarceration back to those unanswered questions. And the same way that you can trace the genealogy back to another piece of this and if you're going to see is a little all over the place. So just bear with me. One of the things I think about is the way I come to think about this legacy of freedom is as the sort of vexed legacies not of slavery but of anti slavery. So what I mean by that, why is it effects on the one hand, we have to be very honest, abolition did achieve something. It abolished chattel slavery, significant development in world history. And it required a social movement of unprecedented social movement, and unprecedented minutes of action. First and foremost, alone and slave and free African American But also white opposition's.

Unknown Speaker  1:04:03  
But its facts because as I mentioned freedoms and incomplete and as Garrett referenced, I mean, Gary kind of stole some of my tongue. That's okay.

Unknown Speaker  1:04:11  
But it's incomplete in part because evolution was not certainly in the minds of those implemented it had nothing to do with abolishing capitalism or re formulating racial capitalism that wasn't even on the agenda.

Unknown Speaker  1:04:26  
One might even argue that abolition, in a certain sense,

Unknown Speaker  1:04:31  
served the ends of racial capitalism in particular ways. It allowed racial capitalism's are reconstitute itself on more immunologically just rounds. Racial capitalism can now tell the story about itself that it had abolish slavery, not enslaved African Americans who went on strike during the Civil War, not African American abolitionists and their allies who brought the house down, but racial capitalism itself is so good sort of Is the Way Eric Williams once said, The way British historians talked about the abolition of slavery in the British Empire, you would think they have slavery for 400 years just so they could abolish it. This brings us to the backtest question, operational capitalism. Something Dr. You mentioned, I think is really important. Little facts a little before he also says that is right. There's a way in which when we dig deeper into the stories of the system and the chain game, the title of Davido schinsky, his book worse than slavery, stops being a metaphor. And I think that's very disturbing for a lot of us. Because part of why we asked the question legacies of slavery is we all know as a nation, that it it will let me not say we don't all know. But certainly, there's a there's a liberal consensus at least, that slavery was wrong. And since chattel slavery was wrong, we don't Don't know what to do and systems that come after it might have been for some people in their own experiences worse. And when they tell us that we get uncomfortable resistance that's supposed to be where it's supposed to be. Freedom is supposed to be progress linear, moving forward. But I think this genealogy of mass incarceration that you laid out and and some of us are working on just Well, maybe history is not so linear. Maybe that March back towards slavery is a recurring theme in American history. what we might call an emancipation, incarceration, dialectic happens after the Civil War happens after civil rights. This is moments of opening that are closed. I did want to say, maybe raising a sort of question about this new racial capitalism. I think sometimes we forget though, and Gary use this phrase. I think he's right, the ways in which overnight slavery was reproduced. But I do think as historians and as activists, we have to Careful to note the differences between what comes after slavery and slavery. So, for example, most people in the post Civil War South were not on a contract least farm or prison for most people were working sharecroppers Weasley. So in fact, the discipline of the contract least system, the discipline of the chain game is certainly at the heart of racial capitalism, but it's a different kind of racial capitalism than what existed under slavery. And why does that difference matter? It matters because we have to know what we're fighting First of all, but second of all, in that difference, I think we see also a story of what African American people were able to accomplish against really unimaginable ops. Sometimes my students, I try to tell them, you know, sharecropping looks bad in hindsight, but from the perspective of enslaved people, sharecropping couldn't be in many ways in advance the basic and right to have your own place to not have that white gaze and intrusion in the same way you had over slavery could be a remarkable, life changing transformation. And that story is just as important as convict leasing and the horrors of it, because that's also the genealogy of resistance. And if we only tell histories of oppression, racial capitalism, always there's no struggle, no concert station, we're not actually writing histories that help us undo mass incarceration.

Unknown Speaker  1:08:30  
This is related

Unknown Speaker  1:08:33  
and thinking through something like racial capitalism. I wonder too, if the question of legacies of slavery also does some geographical work, it focuses squarely on the south. And I wonder if perhaps there's a national origin story that includes the stuff that takes this up seriously that even you can center it. What about California? Free State, not the various convict lease systems they have for native and Americans and African Americans or slavery. There's a California story here to war. What about Native Americans who are detained by the Union Army and transfer via a series of forts from the planes to prisons in the south. Some of you may know this. Thousands of Native American prisoners are detained, send on trains to prisons throughout the south, including places like fort Pickens and Pensacola, or St. Augustine. And they're being incarcerated, sort of around the same just in Florida, around the same part of Northern Florida. We have the turpentine camps and the convict lease system. So there's another question here about the Native American history of detention. I would argue that the in some sense of contact least camps and prison farms are often orchestrated by state governments. Native American detention in the post Civil War era is the first one of the first examples of federal detention architecture. We start if you just look at, if you just look at the maps, just let me get a chance. All the military forests all over the West, if you stop calling them forts and you start calling them prisons, because that's where they detain Native Americans, then you start to see a different kind of carceral archipelago. So something for us to think about, how do we weave together the stories of Native American incarceration and African American incarceration? That's something I'm working on right now.

Unknown Speaker  1:10:29  
All right. Now,

Unknown Speaker  1:10:35  
one more thing, and then I'll go to some sort of theoretical questions

Unknown Speaker  1:10:39  
related to this question of anti slavery, I think something I've noticed and I'm open to hearing, I would love to hear what others think of it is, this seems to me there's been a curious development in the last 1015 years that is the rise and consolidation of a very important prison abolitionist movement, which all of you tested and development within historiography that kind of works against that. And there's been a kind of historical move to be critical of the first abolitionism. And much of this history focuses on what they don't know what they didn't accomplish, how condescending they were, how racist they were, I should know, I'm part of this field. That's what my whole dissertation was pointing out the inconsistency of the first abolitionists. But I've since come to think that that work is not as radical as we think it is. spending our time talking about how past activists failed, and what they did wrong, actually doesn't help contemporary activists. Because the contemporary abolitionist movement is also going to make mistakes. We're also going to fail. We're also going to not get things right. And guess what?

Unknown Speaker  1:11:51  
White people today, still reasons.

Unknown Speaker  1:11:55  
So we have the same issues that the abolitionists had in the 19th century. We're not better than them. In some ways, if you go read the original sources, there are a lot of early abolitionists were, frankly, better on race than most people today. So I think as scholars, we need to think about the stories we tell them what genre we're using the telephone. Are we writing about the early abolitionists through the lens of tragedy? They were bound to fail because they didn't do this right of that, right. I think we make a mistake when we do that. I think what we should instead think about is the concept of defeat, what were people up against? What did they try to do? And how do they defeat it? Whether it consistencies Absolutely. Should white our listeners have listened to African American evolution is born centralist? Absolutely no question. But that's true about our own movement to as I think we have to be careful on how we tell the stories of the past.

Unknown Speaker  1:12:52  
Two theoretic points our

Unknown Speaker  1:12:58  
this one you may not like

Unknown Speaker  1:13:00  
I was walking to the event yesterday. And it has to sign on the way that note and I didn't know this. I just lectured on reconstruction this week. But apparently, General Grant, and General Sherman coordinated the Vicksburg campaign during the Civil War from here in Oxford, Mississippi. And those of you who are familiar with the Civil War, know that the Vicksburg pen campaign when the Union army took Vicksburg was critical, because it gave me an army control the Mississippi, which circled the Confederacy and played a major role in the victory of the Union Army and the abolition of slavery. Why do I say that?

Unknown Speaker  1:13:37  
I think one of the things those of us who have this this movement have to have a conversation about is the role of the state. Because I think

Unknown Speaker  1:13:44  
sometimes I find I could be wrong. I sense that there's a kind of implicit criticism of all things stay related, and much of what I read, and yet the story of abolition of the 19th century The story of the state is a story of activists pressuring and wielding the state to undo slavery. And I'm not sure we're going to abolish mass incarceration or produce something that we want to live in without wielding that kind of power. I think there are downsides to it. We all know it. We've all read about it. Right? Every time a movement demand state intervention expands the police capacities of the state. But I think that story leaves us

Unknown Speaker  1:14:30  
on armed for how to think about how the

Unknown Speaker  1:14:36  
guilt and innocence

Garrett Felber  1:14:38  
I think, and

Unknown Speaker  1:14:41  
something else I've noticed in sort of histories of slavery that I think we should need to think about is a presumption or what I would call the presumption of the slaves innocence. And that is writing about enslaved people who ran away, punished, we take for granted that they do Nothing wrong, because the rules were unjust, therefore, they weren't actually criminals. I think we should avoid this. I think when we look at runaway slave runaways in the archive, we should sit with the fact that they were in fact from. And then when we not in a moral sense, but in a legal sense. And then if we continue to write about enslaved people in the past as innocent, we in a weird way, actually justify the innocent guilt complex that underpins mass incarceration, as if it's late if people are innocent people who are locked up to they are guilty, because somehow the last day or just with the laws back then were unjust. I think we need to see that laws always serve the powerful. Right. And so we may not deem them guilty. But when we talk about their actual status in society, they were guilty. They committed a crime they stole themselves, right? This wasn't metaphorical. This was real.

Unknown Speaker  1:16:00  
My last film, and Gareth alluded to this.

Unknown Speaker  1:16:03  
And thinking about something like the legacies of slavery, I think we have to be unequivocal that

Unknown Speaker  1:16:10  
that the demand for Reparations is an important demand and part in some ways of the abolitionist project.

Unknown Speaker  1:16:18  
And not because you could ever account for the experiences like there's no accounting

Unknown Speaker  1:16:25  
is still important to manage. And when people tell you all what we can, how would you implement doesn't matter. Right, interested in having the demand that has to be made, because they realize that the heart of this country, but I would suggest that we can make a similar claim about mass incarceration. And one of the things I tried to do, starting with friends and family and moving out, is just count the number of years that have been stolen from people. How much life has been taken.

Unknown Speaker  1:16:55  
How many generations have been destroyed?

Unknown Speaker  1:16:58  
I think reparations is not something About legacies of chattel slavery but the legacies of mass incarceration with which we don't even, we haven't been fully able to see yet what the impact of this system is. So let's just

p2  1:17:12  
look forward to hearing from everybody.

p3  1:17:26  
So an honor to be here. It's an honor to be here.

Because of all of the fantastic elders, with whom I'm going to get to share stage, it's an honor to be here, particularly though, because of the chance to try to factor a lot of the folks stolen generations and really, it's particularly an honor to be here because of everybody who's younger than me, which is a gradually increasing part of the population but I really

I'm feel very proud to be here and be allowed to talk to

my new hashtag is just like #GFF.

Gotta fucking Felber.

Garrett Felber  1:18:17  
Please disappear.

Unknown Speaker  1:18:20  
is just amazing.

p3  1:18:22  
And I understand that, that that is like so many things. He's a name, which stands for a large group of people here at the University of Mississippi. And it's very inspiring what you're doing here, and so I want to lift that up, and thank you all.

Um, so I have just finished a book about the history of St. Louis, and I'm going to talk about St. Louis. And the reason that I think that's important to do is that I think that the history St. Louis stands at the juncture of empire and anti blackness in the history of United States. And I think among the things that we need to think about undoing if we're going to address we're going to really try to imagine what a comprehensive cancer program abolition democracy would be, is we need to think very hard about the history of United States imperialism. And we need to have that be an anti imperialist project, I think in the way that that max just suggested. And so Historically, the way that I've been thinking about that is to try to imagine several histories, several genealogies of mass incarceration.

The Dred Scott decision hinged upon the same us constitutional clause as the Missouri Compromise debate, which is article four, Section two, which stipulates that, that no state can discriminate against the citizens of the other state of another state is called interstate commerce and what it does, I'm sorry for saying it's called that that is like someone's up against me like Trump PTSD to say it's called. So interstate comity is, is the notion that one state can't discriminate against the citizens of the other state of another state. So to say free people of color might be a citizen in people who might be citizens in Pennsylvania can't be citizens in Missouri violates that clause in the Constitution. That's a central aspect of the jurisprudence of Dred Scott. And so we think of or have been trying to think of Dred Scott as a inflection point in the history of pro slavery, but it is also an inflection point in the history of anti blackness more generally. Right? The idea of no rights which the white man is bound to respect is a part of this notion of the white man's country that was enshrined in the Missouri constitution. So I want to do by by focusing on this is to focus on the connections between Empire and anti blackness. Missouri and St. Louis in particular was through the 19th century, the

headquarters of the United States military, Jefferson Barracks, and St. Louis was the headquarter of the Western department, United States military. And virtually all of the Indian Wars in the 19th century was staged or imported out of Jefferson Barracks. And so what I'm interested in is the way that this place which is the nerve center of Indian War and Indian removal is also the nerve center of this particular form of exclusion, so anti blackness and anti blackness which has a similar shape to the notion of Indian removal and extermination. You don't have to trust me about that though. You can trust Francis Blair Lincoln's right hand man and missourian man to home there's a statue in St. Louis in 1859, his address given in city of Boston, we don't want to imagine an August thing. All the stuff going to happen in Mississippi, a lot of it happened in Massachusetts, the destiny of the races of the continent, but there are made in 1859 that the races of the continent needed to be separated by which he means that all the non white people need to be removed from the good parts of the continent. Blacks and To the tropics, white or gamers in the temperate zone redeemers is the word he used, and the wild beasts and wild tribes of men who pursue them to the southern margins of the Congo. So Blair's imagining a kind of a Continental removalist exclusion list version of racial management, the alternative for Blair was all who labor will be reduced to the condition of slavery. So this is a program which is designed to speak to impecunious white people to poor and working class white people who he is saying will be enslaved and last, all the other races are moved. This is the foundation of free labor is Free Soil ideology, it's the foundation of the Republican Party. It's the foundation of the party of Lincoln. And that is also the party of the Transcontinental Railroad, the moral Act, the Homestead Act, so the very This is really to underline what what Max was saying is is about the rep the the dialectic of incarceration and emancipation. The party of Lincoln is also the party of Empire. And the party of Lincoln, as even as it is the party of Empire is the party of working class and poor, immigrant White, who do not want to compete with it with enslaved people do not want to be dominated politically by slaveholders. And so it is the party of the white man's country. So that that's the 19th century story. And what I've tried to do in writing this book about St. Louis is to try to trace that story forward the story of the white man's country in the West

through various moments in the history of St. Louis most notably the St. Louis race massacre 1917. So that that takes us to a different economic frame a different stage in the history of racial capitalism, which is the moment of industrial production and black migration. The story of a single is race massacre is generally and rightly but I would say incompletely told as a story of labor conflict over the are centered around the question of whether or not black migrants will have jobs and the industrial plants of the St. Louis. And that has to do with the way that the initial reporting came out of the St. Louis. It has to do with the fact that the the newspaper reporters were downtown, when when black men came off the shifts at the factories, they were attacked in downtown St. Louis, by by white terrorists. And that's the story that came out of a newspaper but then when I can be well, it's when I'm two days later DC loss and you have to imagine it be wells, going from Chicago to East St. Louis and getting off a train where there are still dead bodies. She's crossed a creek Kochi Creek where there's still dead bodies choking the creek buildings are still smoldering, I mean that she's walking alone. The the indomitability of that images is perhaps more valuable than anything else that I can say today.

What she did was she went to the neighborhoods and she talked to black women,

mostly, and talked about the way that the St. Louis massacre was not simply an attack on black labor. It was an attack on black households. It was an attack on black women and children and really, I'm a possibility of a future future for black life in the St. Louis and so it was an An effort to destroy the black neighborhood of the St. Louis and to drive people out. Many of whom live across the bridge to St. Louis, to be subjected to further rounds of dispossession and driving out.

heard of that story that is a story that I tell

in, in the wake of the the fantastic work of Fastlane. A lot of people don't end up reading books just because they're about St. Louis. So if you have not read grassroots at the gateway, I commend it to you. It's an amazing book. And when when tries to argue in that book is that while the South in the aftermath of civil rights are in response to civil rights, had massive resistance, the Midwest, the industrial cities in the Midwest, had massive redevelopment and so part of the story of St. Louis is about the destruction of the black neighborhoods of St. Louis.

Then right from St. Louis,

Unknown Speaker  1:30:10  
right

p3  1:30:12  
along the riverfront in 1839. And particularly notoriously in St. Louis is no Creek Valley and 1859. There's a different form of capitalism, I would argue a different form of real estate of racial capitalism, which is a real estate speculative version of capitalism. Mill Creek Valley in 18, and 1959. Was it involved the destruction of 470 acres of St. Louis 20,000 people were displaced. There was no plan for where they would go. And there was really no plan for redeveloping no Creek Valley Mill Creek Valley is today, basically barren. And so this again, seems to me to be a different moment in the history. History of the white man's country and in the genealogy of mass incarceration, which is about the cantonment and removal of black people in relationship to speculative possibilities for for whites in this case real estate. Some of those displaced from Mill Creek Valley eventually made it into the protego housing project. And what happens I think emblematic Lee improved. I go but really throughout the city and throughout the United States, and the 1960s and 70s is another way another effort to make money off of the sequesteration and arm policing of black people what happens improved I go, I would argue is a kind of a

Garrett Felber  1:31:51  
it's a it's

p3  1:31:53  
emblem of the history of the Military University industrial complex. One way Need to communicate that is to say that by 1963 when protego becomes officially to become a problem, there were more sociologists working in Pruitt I go then there were maintenance workers. Right? So that was really happening there is a black people are being content on in a knowledge producing federally sponsored project about black social dysfunction, right? That project has a genocidal edge, which is to say at the very same time that you have armies of sociologist going into prototype of the army chemical Corps is doing radio airborne radio logical experiments on the Pruitt, Idaho housing project. Right so the these people who are sequestered and protego are being turned into a resource for state government. I realized that for the last five minutes, I had been speaking in a way that is completely

derived from, from the work of

Unknown Speaker  1:33:15  
not only my hero but my daughter's hero, Ruth Wilson Gilmartin. About the way it is that that surplus

p3  1:33:26  
and particularly surplus state capacity is

Unknown Speaker  1:33:33  
typically

p3  1:33:34  
located on to black populations and black people

Unknown Speaker  1:33:38  
Um in the 1960s and 1970s. And this is something that I learned from Elizabeth Hansen. St. Louis was a place where police departments nationally pioneered data collection on this same population of people in North St. Louis are not prototype. So when I see there is a different moment in the history that the

p3  1:34:00  
The history of mass incarceration a different moment in the history of racial capitalism, which is about the spatial sequesteration. And then knowledge production. So it's about the way in which African American people were used as a reservoir for the production of military industrial knowledge. I'm finally finished with the history of Ferguson and the way that you could you could imagine that there's a population of people over generations who are moved from St. Louis to Mill Creek Valley. To prove it, I go to Ferguson, and our current moment of extraction and this is this is really the place

Unknown Speaker  1:34:42  
where

p3  1:34:45  
my debt to ruthless would go more clearly.

And the way that there is an economy based on a population that is from the standpoint of Production now surplus, but from which there's still a great deal of extraction, extraction in the form of fines and fees extraction in the form of payday loans extraction in the form, particularly in St. Louis and also throughout the United States of realist of development tax abatements. And so one thing that I become obsessed with is the way in which small pockets of black population are mobilized in St. Louis to produce the sort of corporate welfare through tax abatement. And then finally, in the in the institution to deserve a central concern to us which is in the prison system. In Missouri, I think every single state prison has either been built or renovated since 1980 and so that's a fairly large sector of, of the state government of the state of Missouri, and of the way that it reaches out into the state from Jefferson City.

Again, thank you very much. It's a real honor to be here.

p4  1:36:26  
Hi, I have some slides.

Unknown Speaker  1:36:57  
Thank you for having me here.

Anne Twitty  1:37:00  
Hopefully y'all can hear me. Okay.

Unknown Speaker  1:37:03  
I'm really grateful to be here. Thank you so much for inviting me. Thank y'all for having me on this panel. I'm amazed to be sitting amongst these folks. And I'm amazed that so many people are in the room. Perfect. So legacies of slavery. I'm an activist. I'm a writer, I'm a journalist.

Unknown Speaker  1:37:25  
I was a historian briefly in high school.

Anne Twitty  1:37:29  
So I do fit in.

Unknown Speaker  1:37:31  
But when when talking about the legacies of slavery, I think that there are four big pillars that really connect what our system is currently doing with what it's perfected back during the chattel slavery era. And that is separate family ties. So when people are removed from their communities, their loved ones, have limited access to educational opportunities. A lot of prison programs really stop at GED program, exploitive labor. So people only being paid maybe 10 cents an hour in anything states like Georgia pay an extra fine not to pay anything to the prisoners that that work for them there. And so the last thing is restricted voting rights. So as an activist, I was able to have the honor of being selected by prisoners to speak on their behalf. So I'm here as a vessel. So I want to chart out the landscape, the most recent landscape of the prison resistance movement. Prison resistance is ongoing. There's always resistance happening in the prison, whether we know about it or not, so long as people are being oppressed people are resisting. So when we identify these key moments, it's not that suddenly prisoners grows up and decided to do something is that suddenly people were paying attention and decided to document what was happening, and so in 1971 There was the Attica uprising in response to George Jackson's assassination. In that same year earlier that same year, and we see the for the, for one of the first times this, this trend of nationwide unity among incarcerated folks. So people in New York are responding to what was happening to people in California behind the wall. And so, in more recent years, we see hunger strikes, and work strikes, and boycotts happening, and solidarity across state lines in places like Georgia and California, and news and media, corporate media were paying more attention to what was happening behind the wall. And so in 2014, we saw a work stoppage with the free Alabama movement and prisoners on the inside. They've already been organizing these things. It's just that we were paying attention more and then it's 2016 we saw the largest of national prison strike of our time, prisoners participated in work stoppages, boycotts of commissary, boycotting and telephone. Prison telephones are owned by a by a monopoly company, global tel link. And so when prisoners decided not to use the phones, there's a big hit when prisoners decide not to order commissary.

Unknown Speaker  1:40:27  
Companies like secure pack, take a big hit.

Cam  1:40:31  
So then,

Unknown Speaker  1:40:33  
we've got in 2016, that there were the national prison strike, each state was encouraged to write their own demands for the National strike. And that was the year I graduated. So in 2018, incarcerated folks found me and said, Hey, we want you to be our national spokesperson for their 2018 Britain strike, which to date has been the largest prison strike of its time, and I want to try out some differences between the 2016 And then 2018 National. So, in both there was a national call a call out for people to participate no matter where they were at and facilities detention centers, juvenile detention centers and detention centers, jails, prisons, wherever people were being combined men, women and children. There was a national call put put out, and journalists participated in both of these. It was initiated through family 2016 initiated to journalism 2018. I walked the incarcerated workers Organizing Committee played a heavy role in 2016 with communications and then in 2018. It was organized through a independent coordinator myself. We saw specific forms of participation that were charted out in 2018. That made the strike pretty successful. Like I said, it didn't matter whether someone was in isolation in solitary whether they were into the world population there was a way to participate, whether that was a sit in protest, peacefully sitting in a common area and not moving until lockdown. Or if someone was in solitary confinement, they could participate through a hunger strike. So no matter where someone was at on the prison grounds, they had the ability to participate, which made it more successful. We also saw more participation, because we saw more outside participation. So we are able to see more inside participation, when we on the outside are able to communicate and uplift what's going on on the inside. What happens on the inside, regardless of how powerful and how unified people are, it can be rendered insignificant if we aren't shining a light on it out here. So our role as activists is to make sure that we uplift the actions that are happening on the inside, and then those actions will continue The states that participated in the national prison strike. I was in Washington at the time were immigrants at to homeless detention center put Washington on the map. There was also prisoners. I'm from Michigan. So in Michigan prisoners up in the Upper Peninsula of Michigan on the map. Prisoners participated at Burnside prison in Nova Scotia, Canada, and in brief at eclipsing prison 127 prisoners participated

Anne Twitty  1:43:27  
in the a wing.

Unknown Speaker  1:43:28  
So I think that it was so successful because of the fact that we had an international coalition of folks over 400 organizations that committed to making sure that as many people as possible about these demands, the demands are posted in April after the Lee County massacre. Some people call it a riot. It was a massacre. prisoners are on lockdown for months and months at a time tensions turned into conflict. They were neglected when that conflict turned into deaths. And so we saw that nine people lose their lives as a result of that massacre. And prisoners wanted to make sure that this couldn't happen again, which is why they made a call for the National Australia. And on the side, I put the list of the the 10 demands demand number 10. The demand for the right to vote was the birth of this new movement that we are currently in today. So the birth of the new movement, which I call the new suffrage movement, or also the right to vote campaign, the call for people who are impacted by incarceration to have voting rights. Every single person who's a citizen in this country should have the right to vote. And I believe that this is one of the most critical demands because once we make sure that people have their voting rights, then they can have the power to shift their own environments. But when we continue to vote on their behalf. You don't have the experience or the knowledge to make the changes that needs to be made. And so I charted out the states that did introduce legislation in their state legislature to restore the voting rights of people on probation, parole or in prison. And then on the side, you'll see the cop out states, Georgia, Mississippi and South Carolina, they initiated legislation to study the effects of lack of voting rights, but the initiation of legislation does start a conversation. So that's important, but we saw

Unknown Speaker  1:45:37  
a huge

Unknown Speaker  1:45:40  
trend this year, and a shift in thinking of the importance of people having the right to vote. And our campaign goes as far as saying that people behind the wall should have voting rights. Participating in policy is a part of rehabilitation participating in civics is a part of rehabilitation and why not Become a part of that process during your incarceration. Of these people have the time to draft legislation. They're already drafting legislation and drafting proposals. So to give them that political power and to encourage them to be a part of the Civic process could really help in in developing people beyond criminal mindsets and behaviors that we want to deter. So I encourage people to think about why. Why do prisoners need voting rights, the same reason why people need voting rights. Voting is not a privilege. It is an absolute necessity and natural rights of citizenship. And it's a critical aspect of our democracy. It's critical for our democracy to operate successfully. We can see that our prisons are very, in very desperate need of transformation, not just reformation, and how can we make sure that our prisons operate effectively for the people there Without giving them a voice on on what we should be doing. And so we know that if we can give people these voting rights, then we can see some dramatic changes in our system. And because presidents don't have voting rights, public officials aren't held accountable to their constituents in the prison at all. Their they have no necessity to go visit prisoners to hear from prisoners to respond to their letters, because their constituents that are just like a free body, that three fifths compromise their their their counted, but their voice is not represented. But we know that

Cam  1:47:39  
civic engagement, like I said, contributes to

Unknown Speaker  1:47:41  
the productive aspect of prison and incorporate into pected voices can really transform the system. And so I just want to highlight some states that are a part of our cohort, and some of the legislation that we're supporting. At this point in the year. There are two states who still have the opportunity. So as anyone who From California, whoo. So ACA six and made it through assembly and it's on the Senate side now. So call your senators with your senator. Call your legislator, if anyone from New Jersey. Cool. So New Jersey's bill x 21. And with that s

Cam  1:48:17  
2100

Unknown Speaker  1:48:18  
is now

Cam  1:48:20  
it's been replaced by another bill.

Unknown Speaker  1:48:22  
So the bill was originally to restore prisoner probationers and parolees voting rights. The assembly just created another bill to restore probation or parole, the voting rights, which we fully support. But please call your senator and advocate for them to go that extra mile and get prisoners direct to go back.

Cam  1:48:41  
And so

Unknown Speaker  1:48:44  
that's the end of my presentation.

Anne Twitty  1:48:53  
Just a tiny bit late, but I'm sure all of you have many questions for these tremendous presentation. gotten a chance to hear over the last hour and a half. So I'm not going the floor for two questions, and I'll borrow slightly from our break. Does anybody want to ask a question to our panelists? We have a mic setup. So we don't have immediate questions. I will say I can certainly, I definitely have a lot of questions in my mind. And that question is, the very first one that comes to mind is, you know, the United States is not exceptional and having slavery of slavery is practice, especially free space slavery is practice throughout the Western Hemisphere. But United States is exceptional in terms of its mass incarceration problem today. So sort of building off something that Max was talking about what has made the United States so exceptional in this regard? Are we truly talking about a legacy of slavery? Or is there something else to explain why the United States has the mass incarceration problem it does when slavery was such a Western Hemisphere problem writ large

Unknown Speaker  1:50:06  
It's a very good question. I'm not sure I'll be able to answer this something I think about a lot and my own work I, one of the things I've tried to do is to

Unknown Speaker  1:50:18  
sort of prevent July's the United States temporarily, and thinking about the history of racialized punishment, so that we can actually get a better sense of how we in fact, develop a prison because as you're saying, right, hopefully, you folks know 95% of the slave trade did not go to the United States and went to the Americans. Right, zil, the Caribbean, is running huge slave societies. And what's interesting is they actually have very similar dynamics to the United States. So freedom is accompanied by vagrancy statutes, construction of new kinds of disciplinary institutions. So there's a whole actually sort of common experiences in these societies and then the question becomes what separates nicely? So I'll offer one interpretation. And that is my my sense is that mass incarceration maybe speaks to Walters point a little bit about Empire. Mass incarceration, in some sense has a lot to do with what does anti black racism. So punitive policies, what do these look like in the country that sits of top world capitals that has more money that has more capacity? Right? When I look at say, compare, just as an example, let's compare the United States South after the Civil War with a place like Jamaica, after emancipation 1830s. In fact, the incarceration rate for free people in Jamaica 1930s is actually on par with contemporary incarceration rates in the United States. They're not being held for long times. But the number of people passing through prisons is is is is tremendous. But to make it never develops the same economic estate capacities in fact, as the literature shows, part Why you have evolution in the Caribbean is because the British imperial political economy shifts its focus towards India and Asia, right. So there's not the same development. So I think one of the ways that makes sense of mass incarceration, what separates United States from other post slavery societies is that this post slavery society, especially following World War Two, emerges as a global engine mob sits atop the supply chain of global capitalism, and also has an enormous state capacity. And this again, as well, as Walter said, we're all sort of building on the work of with Gilmore here, but capacity that not that originally isn't about incarceration. It's about. So the military industrial complex, it's about even things that we think of as being sometimes antithetical to incarceration, like education, school, loans, federal investments and all kinds of capacity. But once you have that setup, it can turn to something else. I think it's a good question. That's how I try to work.

Unknown Speaker  1:53:44  
I'll just repeat that I'm going to show you why was a really important question sort of given this larger question about the international context and other kinds of histories. What terminology do we use to describe the situation as states and what is the difference between something like mass incarceration or the carceral state, or that is that that I capture that right? Yeah. Well, I think your question makes me think about the students I teach. One of the things I do when I teach courses on mass incarceration it to a lot of history, that one of the challenges when you do like deep histories of mass incarceration, is your students end up writing. They use the phrase mass incarceration to describe time periods where

Provost Noel Wilkin  1:54:31  
it's not happening.

Unknown Speaker  1:54:32  
And so one of the things I've had to think about is how do we talk about a kind of architecture of racialized punishment, but we still remain sensitive to historical specificity. We say mass incarceration, of course, will stay we're really talking about a late 20th century moment, when not only the prison population but the capacities to incarcerate expand as unprecedented ways. And that particular story requires a history. Elizabeth Hinton has given us one of the best ones But there's other histories to other chapter. Why did that happen? I think those of us who work on earlier periods are trying to lay out a set of claims about what was the material there, what material that they use ideologically, and in terms of capacity, but was there already that can then be turned into mass incarceration?

p3  1:55:20  
I think it's a terrific question, is it? It's really, really complicated to imagine a historical genealogy without reading things backward and appropriately. And so so I think that's what we're trying to do. And then I think there's another question there, which is, is also not so much about historical genealogy. But how do we think about the relationship between different institutions and practices in our society to the prism and so that's why I would try to talk about payday loans. At the same time I would try to talk about prisons, but the thing that really struck me Well, one of the many things about what the focus of this morning that struck me was when he said he quoted the man. And so when I left the prison, I went from maximum to minimum security. And that that helped me think about how we might think about the relationship of different institutions in a kind of a contemporaneous, rather than store with a little bit,

Unknown Speaker  1:56:30  
thinking about the relationships of certain institutions to the present, just thinking about the public school to prison pipeline,

Unknown Speaker  1:56:37  
the shelter prison pipeline and the housing project to

Unknown Speaker  1:56:39  
prison pipeline. We've got so many pipelines in our society to this institution, it makes you think, why is it here? We built so many of them and now we got all these pipelines going. So we think about how what mass incarceration is. I think that's a critical aspect to it, the relationships

Anne Twitty  1:56:58  
I know this conversation is going to continue I'm going to make a decision that we're going to start the next panel at 1050. Please give our panelists a round of

Cam  1:57:16  
panelists to

Anne Twitty  1:57:17  
join us here at the front. I'm sure that that panel leader would like to have some conversation with them before we get started.

Transcribed by https://otter.ai
