Unknown Speaker  0:00  
What are you doing?

Unknown Speaker  0:03  
It's really good to be up here. I mean, be honest, but I'm really happy to be here. I want to echo the many things that have been given to Garrett and all the organizers. I really appreciated. Miriam's comments last night about the kind of labor that goes into bringing people together like this and the importance of these kinds of opportunities. Some especially grateful I'm very honored as well to have been asked to present the last few days.

Unknown Speaker  0:33  
And I also and just really thrilled to be here among a lot of my teachers and mentors, comrades, and I love the word that Alice can use earlier co strugglers and friends as well. So as Marie's mentioned, I published a book earlier this year about grassroots organizing, and the politics of violence, safety, racial criminalization and racialized punishment. Release. And it traces the emergence and influence of a form of feminism that can see the struggle, the struggle, the end the violence of the crustal state, and struggling to eradicate sexual and domestic violence as indivisibly things. So I want to talk today about feminism and abolition. And I want to kind of riff off the conference title a little bit, and talk about the making and unmaking of carceral feminism.

Unknown Speaker  1:30  
So for those who might be unfamiliar with the term personal feminism, it's been used to describe a feminism that conceives of criminalization and imprisonment as an antidote to gender based violence rather than forms of gender based violence in their own rights. Or as Elizabeth Bernstein and first coined the term Next go is recently summarized of feminism compatible with police the time

Unknown Speaker  1:57  
so I want to talk briefly first about them. Making a personal feminism and then spent the majority of my time talking about.

Unknown Speaker  2:05  
So I want to draw a little bit on the work of that Richie Christian p Miller and Marie Gottschalk, and more recently named Kim set a feminist scholar activists who have helped show us how 1970s grassroots feminist campaigns against sexual and domestic violence dance. Let me Kim cause the quote carceral creep over the last several decades, increasingly framing gender violence as a crime control problem, and helping in that process to fuel and legitimate policing, the policing and prison build up of the late 20th century. So in the 1970s, this is really when we see the start of a grassroots proliferation and cities and towns all over the country. The creation of rape crisis centers and battered women's shelters, you know, two kinds of movement infrastructure that You know, it's a pretty normal life and even naturalized part of our lives today. But much of that just did not exist before the 70s. And so you have these volunteer line, grassroots startup organizations that really take together through people's no blood, sweat tears. And these were oftentimes organizations that was started by survivors. And they were premised on the idea of mutual aid. So people actually supporting each other who shared a direct experience with the particular forms of violence that were being focused on, which is a kind of principle that we're talking about a lot the last couple of days. On some people impacted directly informing and leading work. By the time we hit the mid 70s, here about 500 different rape crisis centers and battered women's shelters around the country, and many of them are trying to figure out how to meet what seems like a bottomless need, right so they get the resources together to have a phone line or maybe offer a few shelter beds or something They're finding that the phone is ringing off the hook that they can't keep up with the kind of need that exists as more more people are politicizing their experiences of surviving sexual domestic violence. So then any plans right to keep these organizations going? And as people start searching for funding go searching for that funding in the 1970s, when we're seeing the rollback of what can make a monetary history called are endemic social welfare state, right. So we're seeing austerity cuts, we're seeing fewer fewer resources through social welfare state is shrinking of that anemic social welfare state. And on the other hand, as Elizabeth Hinton has helped us see, the 1970s are in fact, a really, really important decade for the expansion of the infrastructure of policing, but really helped to bring about the kind of prison explosion that we don't worry mothers helped us understand happens in the 1980s. And so specifically, the long course Systems administration that Mary mentioned last night is created in 1968 by the omnibus Crime Control streets act. And that agency, that huge sprawling federal agency that Hinton helps us understand was really, really important for shaping and speeding and subsidizing 10s of thousands of different local and state level Crime Control initiatives. So place a lot more police on the streets. And it also played a really important role in partnering with FBI to bring down racist oppression against black and other radical activists. And it also offered funding to rape crisis centers and battered women's shelters.

Unknown Speaker  5:41  
A lot of activists thought maybe they could take the money and run they were very fierce debates that ensued about whether or not this money was you know, money that they could work with or should work with it should take and increasingly most sexual assault agencies and domestic violence agencies say increasingly can be called did take Money, the ones that stayed afloat and survived the 70s primarily took those funds. And as they took control monies over the course of the late 70s and into the 80s, they were pressed event collecting handover data, to encourage prosecutions and to see law enforcement as their key community partner quote, unquote, rather than, say, other social movements of progressive and radical movement. So this carceral feminist orientation, then becomes even further entrenched and institutionalized in 1994. With the passage of the Violence Against Women Act, thanks to presidential hopeful, Joe Biden, so unprecedented federal funding goes towards the prosecution of sexual domestic violence as well as prevent providing services for survivors. Fun fact 80% 80 to 90% of that funding, Ben and now went to primarily training up prosecutors, police and judges rather than to feminists control their feminists lead Survivors centered services and the Violence Against Women Act as part of a mammoth 1994 crime bill that was seen as incredible assault, devastating assault on hues of color. Okay, so Mary was talking last night about the kinds of questions that she asked herself when considering a campaign target. And I hope that I wrote these down, right. She asked them to reform provide material relief. Does it leave out a marginalized group? Does it legitimize a status system we're trying to dismantle? Does it divide people into deserving and undeserving groups? What logic does it reinforce? And are those logics painted and remembered story? The violence against women that failed every one of these tests? Okay, I'm ready five minutes. So as Ben Richie importantly shows us in her brilliant book arrested justice, law and order feminism not only failed to offer material with elites and most vulnerable to buyers, but it also contributed to The conditions that facilitate both institutional and interpersonal violence against the same survivors. So this kind of legal contradiction became the catalyst for several different organizations that were created in the late 90s and early 2000s, including a black feminist organization. I joined in Seattle, Washington Post communities Against Rape and abuse, and including the organization incite women of color and silence that helps to bring together those of us working around the country that we're trying to attend to this dangerous and lethal connection.

Unknown Speaker  8:33  
In 2001, insight and political resistance released something of a statement on gender violence and the prison industrial complex that asked for these two movements, one to abolish imprisonment on one hand, and the movement to abolish gender based violence and the other to figure out how to build a stronger coalition and to make sure that our visions goals and tactics were in service to one another. And this was really the political formation me as a young anti rape activists that brought me to prison abolition work, and that also influenced the kinds of questions that I want to ask as a scholar reader. So at last night's amazing keynote, Ruthie posed the question, quote, how can we learn from past campaigns that have remnants and active expressions and the work that people do today? and historians, we oftentimes when someone's talking about this is the usable past or useful paths? And I think this was really the question that ultimately, ultimately brought me to want to research and write about the 1970s. So I was really moved in impelled by these accounts of the making of crystal feminism, but I also wanted to better understand kind of push back and fight back for that happened in that period. I wanted to know about the kinds of ideas and practices that have maybe taken shape beyond, you know, the purview of the carceral state and beyond feminist mainstreaming, and what I found was that the question of whether and how to align with the criminal legal system was actually a pretty serious Faultline among into violence activists and feminists 70s. So the process of state co optation was met with lots and lots of pushback, and also importantly inspired other kinds of political practices and imaginaries. So anti personal feminism took shape through Alliance building across prison walls through coalition building across struggles for racial economic justice, gender and sexual liberation, psychiatric patients rights and prison abolition. Personal feminists campaigns are spearheaded by radical women of color, and anti racist white women and many of them lesbian identify, then they for granted violence against black from Indigenous women, for working class women, gender and sexual outsiders and mostly will criminal crazy. And this activism generated an analysis of gender violence that pointed to the carceral state as a source of further harm and safety and address. So just very, very briefly, because I'm so tired Yeah, I just want to highlight three lessons that I learned from studying and researching the history of each person feminism in the 1970s that I think are especially resonant for our abolitionist movements today. And all of these have been talked about in our dress over the last couple of days in some way, shape or form. So the first is what the incomparable Angela why David is described as co living and intersectionality struggles. So several weeks your presenters have talked about the importance of linking seemingly discrete or separate struggles. And in the 1970s, in particular, just to give you an example, mass space defense campaigns for criminalized survivors to color, people who were facing imprisonment facing the death penalty, in some cases, facing being railroaded by the state for engaging in self defense and violence to protect themselves against sexual violence and domestic violence. These cases actually became

Unknown Speaker  11:59  
kind of lightning rod for a range of different social movements to actually come together to interface with one another to share strategies to transform and change each other's thinking. So prison activists, for example, we thought the boundaries of who counted as a political prisoner, and brave activists became an activist.

Unknown Speaker  12:19  
Particular saw a kind of cautionary tale about relying on the tools of criminalization and imprisonment. In these cases that involves criminalize dividers that scramble the binaries, instance and guilt and scramble the binary perpetrator and victim right. The second thing I want to briefly mention is that I'm thinking of organizing across multiple carceral spaces. Something we've also been talking about for the last two days. One, for example, queer feminist activists with personal histories of psychiatric coercion or political ties to movement for the institutionalization and 70s. May both analytical and really practical. connections between the struggles against criminalization and the struggle.

Unknown Speaker  13:06  
And how to think about the space of the last mental hospital and the space of the prison as both having shared logics, but also in some cases, as creating pipelines between the two and how to actually target that kind of linkage. And this led them to really argue that it's crucial to end all forms of teaching and learning from people on the inside, who were theorizing and talking about the ways in which the prison had assumed the role of better in their lives. And also that influenced the ways in which organizers on the outside began to think about the home as a crustal space, particularly for careers for people experiencing abuse. And I think that really resonates with the conversations we've been having about incarceration and what it might look like to build more support on anti violence access. 40 acres fantastic because duration work. And then last week very quickly, the practice of engaging and inside outside organizing again this came up yesterday and Stevie Wilson's beautiful comments about the image of the bird and the two weeks of the bird and him speaking about this today as well. incarcerated women sit down strikes and uprisings drafted and circulated petitions were smuggled uncensor mail in and out of the prison received a range of punishments, including solitary confinement, chances are higher security prison, the denial, parole, and unofficial retribution, like prison staff in the form of verbal and physical abuse and the destruction of their personal belongings. The importance of solidarity, the importance of activists on the outside showing up at the gates responding to phone calls, calling the board and asking, getting word out, piercing and disability of conditions of confinement inside outside of organizing as a way to build communities to participate in important pedagogy spray pedagogy of dissent and unlearning incarceration. And I'm so out of time. So I'll just stop there. Thank you

Unknown Speaker  15:15  
for walking through that.

Unknown Speaker  15:20  
feminism.

Unknown Speaker  15:24  
Amazing scholar. Friend. I'm so happy to share the stage with you. Good afternoon, everyone. I hope you're feeling good on the second day of the movie conference. I'm feeling all right as we approach this really huge topic, about how we ended with a big corporation. I wish I had the answer to that.

Unknown Speaker  15:47  
Otherwise,

Unknown Speaker  15:49  
why are we here? Because, for me, I think it's really all about women. You know, women are not only run the world and The producers of human beings, it is really important that we center women in this conversation around mass incarceration where we've been left out for many, many decades. Good afternoon, friends, comrades and family. Thank you for joining us on this final day of the conference. Like everyone else, I want to thank you for inviting me to contribute to this important topic around incarceration,

Unknown Speaker  16:29  
as well as

Unknown Speaker  16:30  
all the organizers who have put together this conference. And

Unknown Speaker  16:36  
and this convening around how we can think about ways in which we can use our personalities to inform and transform America's modern day team and child system, mass incarceration. My name is Romero and Ralston

Unknown Speaker  16:55  
privilege of speaking this afternoon. On behalf of the California cold For women prisoners cc P and project rebound at California State University Fullerton during this conference

Unknown Speaker  17:14  
what I will be sharing with you during my time or a few common published facts, brief analysis regarding women in prison and an overview of the work with cc WP and reflections from my experiences with incarceration, power building and organizing inside and outside Chris wants to set the tone I want to open with an excerpt from the brilliant Dr. Angela Davis, who said in her 1998 article mass racism reflections on the prison industrial complex and that quote, prisons do not disappear social problems, they disappear human beings, homelessness, unemployment,

Unknown Speaker  17:57  
drug addiction,

Unknown Speaker  17:58  
mental illness, literacy are only a few of the problems that disappear from public view when the human beings contending with them are relegated to Cape Coral. A previously incarcerated person who spent 23 years in prison within the California Department of Corrections, during a time in prison expansion saturated the landscape of the Golden State

Unknown Speaker  18:30  
from 1982 to 2000, California below 22 prisons, increasing its annual corrections budget from 603 million to 10 billion and swelling is incarcerated population by 500%. At age 24, I was sent to one of the world's largest women's prisons the California Institute for women ci w in Corona. California is now second to this predecessor to women's facility cc wF and Chowchilla, California, located 291 miles to the north. The latest CDCR online quarterly report gives a population count of 2781 persons as of June 29. In the spring of 1989, I arrived at prison in an unmarked, nondescript white van with 11 other women, all African American or Latino. Picture the image of the unmarked, nondescript white man loaded with women, changing shadow pack together. Elbow to ask on three narrow position behind two or correction. offices separated by iron real and plexiglass. condemn women sentences, sir. The Political Economy of the prison regime in California ci w located in the heartland of the Chino, dairy farming community, out of sight out.

Unknown Speaker  20:27  
When I stepped out of the van, the only things visible were brick buildings, razor wire, guard towers and cow.

Unknown Speaker  20:38  
When I think on that day, the question I asked myself is had I disappear?

Unknown Speaker  20:47  
The answer is yes. So what becomes a blog and page behind the electrified fences? The mothers says A

Unknown Speaker  21:01  
brand new and loves, who are these five, and more importantly, what happened in our lives that was so discombobulated, and so altering that it lives our incarceration.

Unknown Speaker  21:19  
In 2016, an article titled The road to prison escape from women and girls at the ACLU, who say 92% of all women in California prisons have suffered physical

Unknown Speaker  21:38  
or sexual trauma in their life.

Unknown Speaker  21:43  
I arrived to the prison a broken soul with no idea of how I would survive life behind bars. The prison was built in 1952 When I

Unknown Speaker  22:01  
got there, a few decades

Unknown Speaker  22:03  
later, they will warehouse close to 800.

Unknown Speaker  22:09  
In prison bodies crammed into every crevice of the brick and mortar buildings, dumb Boston sales they will spoil the rose, the medical unit and Dr. Tory and 24 years old. This was my new home. What I was seeing I couldn't comprehend or understand how and why were all these women locked up.

Unknown Speaker  22:35  
What I was witnessing back then,

Unknown Speaker  22:39  
was the rise of incarcerated women and girls. Ci w was thirsty and it seems to assist in gender non conforming and transformed. Like most women who entered the prison system, I had experience years of physical, emotional and mental trauma and struggle with Dr.

Unknown Speaker  23:02  
A 2005 Amnesty International report released women with violence against women.

Unknown Speaker  23:11  
And at the top of it, it said,

Unknown Speaker  23:14  
and I quote,

Unknown Speaker  23:16  
around the world, at least one woman in every country has been coerced into sex, or otherwise abuse in her lifetime. Every year, violence in the home and community devastates the lives of millions of women. gender based violence kills and disabled as many women between the ages of 15 and 44 as cancer and its whole of women's health surpasses that tragic accident. Violence against women is rooted in a global culture of discrimination that denies equal rights with men and women. legitimize is the appropriation of women's bodies or individual gratification or political bans.

Unknown Speaker  24:09  
Moreover, in 2019 45, a sentencing project on incarcerated girls, a nonprofit organization in Washington, DC that works fair and effective criminal justice system claims and I, between 1980 and 2017, the number of incarcerated women increased by more than 750%, rising from a total of 26,378 in 1982, the 225,016 and 2017 is serves the profound involvement of women in the criminal justice system as a result of more expansive bond forcement efforts, safer drug sentencing laws and post areas to reentry that neatly affect women.

Unknown Speaker  25:06  
Last year, the prison policy initiative reported in and I quote on the global context of women's incarceration that we deal with Spike Lee's of the United States still incarcerated, more people.

Unknown Speaker  25:24  
And the rate of women is 130

Unknown Speaker  25:29  
is the largest

Unknown Speaker  25:30  
incarceration rate for women. And although participation rates are declining in the US, the women's rates remain in store.

Unknown Speaker  25:47  
for several decades, scholars

Unknown Speaker  25:51  
and others

Unknown Speaker  25:52  
have researched and written

Unknown Speaker  25:54  
about female pathways.

Unknown Speaker  26:00  
Furthermore, radical black feminist women of color, white women advocating protest, including that victimization by drug related crimes

Unknown Speaker  26:16  
for women,

Unknown Speaker  26:22  
women's incarceration

Unknown Speaker  26:26  
for women who actually should make a friend of mine, who I spent time with

Unknown Speaker  26:34  
in prison

Unknown Speaker  26:36  
is the founder of our

Unknown Speaker  26:42  
grassroots social justice for

Unknown Speaker  26:46  
violence and follows women who see the struggle for races for racial justice.

Unknown Speaker  26:57  
Say, Master, bye bye Increasing.

Unknown Speaker  27:04  
The answer was building and cultivating leadership.

Unknown Speaker  27:09  
sharees knew that advocacy and the collective power of women working together and holding each other inside and outside of prison would work to dismantle and abolish it

Unknown Speaker  27:23  
and bring about change.

Unknown Speaker  27:26  
Since 1995, CCW P has sent to the leadership of this organization of work and political priorities with formerly incarcerated women.

Unknown Speaker  27:40  
I am a long time member of CC

Unknown Speaker  27:44  
and have witnessed

Unknown Speaker  27:45  
the transfer the French the transformative power of marginalized women struggling together to be a sustainable organization that is focused on promoting

Unknown Speaker  27:59  
next year CCW people celebrated Silver Anniversary 25 years of speaking truth regarding women in prison with hundreds of members inside and outside. And two chapters in California when an Oakland

Unknown Speaker  28:17  
CCW program

Unknown Speaker  28:17  
include across the walls busy program, Crossfire writing correspondence. I've dropped arawak campaign which is life

Unknown Speaker  28:30  
which is led by Kelly Savage, a

Unknown Speaker  28:35  
survivor who is now taking control of that campaign if you want to make it work to liberate thousand individuals sentenced to life without possible

Unknown Speaker  28:48  
for for the incarceration commutation application, Firestorm international solidarity campaign, our new campaign need to bond bars led by another woman or a comrade of mine

Unknown Speaker  29:06  
who was also in a lawsuit against California Department of Corrections for committing violence against other women while incarcerated, aspect bar leaders and CC WP is a core member of survivor. And

Unknown Speaker  29:25  
we also have done amazing policy advocacy work. We've co sponsored some progressive criminal justice reform deals. We've eliminated and co sponsors the felony murder elimination field last year. We've eliminated medical copay for incarcerated persons. We've eliminated the one year sentencing enhancing felony convictions and we eliminated a mandatory five years citizens enhanced by

Unknown Speaker  30:02  
grassroots organizations are directly like cc WP are directly impacted. And it is critical to reducing and eliminating

Unknown Speaker  30:17  
all those state and federal legislation has been passed for the population, very little time to dress the issue of violence against women. And as long

Unknown Speaker  30:31  
as the United

Unknown Speaker  30:32  
States continues to disappear, people behind

Unknown Speaker  30:35  
walls,

Unknown Speaker  30:36  
CCW

Unknown Speaker  30:39  
works.

Unknown Speaker  30:42  
And furthermore, women are in control of their own bodies, without interference from the state and into legalized sex work and decriminalize drugs for women and

Unknown Speaker  30:58  
translate

Unknown Speaker  31:16  
Good afternoon.

Unknown Speaker  31:19  
Today days I am honored to be here with all you It is a pleasure to be up on the stage to be amongst all you and the other thing is I have absolutely nothing written down.

Unknown Speaker  31:34  
So we'll see how the stuff

Unknown Speaker  31:40  
it's really a pleasure to be here and so young look like

Unknown Speaker  31:54  
so sorry

Unknown Speaker  32:01  
There was this younger, raised with two parents in the household of Christian household. And because it was a Christian now, so a lot of things were talked about, she was secluded from a lot of the things that was going on in the outside world at the age of 16. She got pregnant and had a

Unknown Speaker  32:26  
goober and because

Unknown Speaker  32:28  
of, you know the circumstances of her father being a pastor in ministry in the church and, and stuff so she planned on getting them

Unknown Speaker  32:42  
and so they plan this wedding and this is a few days later at age 90 wedding, and three days before her 20th birthday. He was killed in a car accident.

Unknown Speaker  33:01  
She was so heartbroken. She was devastated. She was so damaged, that she couldn't really see what that future was ahead of her. So she wind up getting with a good friend of hers and married him turned out to be abusive trauma

Unknown Speaker  33:27  
after she went on the ground, because he found her everywhere, she went on the ground.

Unknown Speaker  33:36  
No one wish she was parents didn't know how to leave a child we were parents. And finally, which got that clear and was able to come back up and try to regain some semblance of a life. A man attempted to rape her

Unknown Speaker  33:58  
and she wound up in prison. Wait nine to 18 years.

Unknown Speaker  34:06  
So let me introduce myself. My name is Sharon white abrogates I am an activist. I am an advocate. I am a social worker. I'm a therapist. I am a pass up minister in the church and I am a taxpayer.

Unknown Speaker  34:33  
I am also the executive director of beyond Rosie's 2020 which is a companion to close Rikers, which was spearheaded which is spearheaded by this wonderful organization called justice leadership, jL USA and Europe. They started this Great movement on closing Rikers Island in New York City, which is a penal colony that houses people detained, or state run. A show beyond Rosie's was birthed out of that because the question always is, what about the women?

Unknown Speaker  35:24  
What about the women? So women? Y'all know what I'm talking about? Okay. My husband calls me a man bashing.

Unknown Speaker  35:36  
And so I'm not a man bashing Not at all, but I do recognize the fact that women are underrepresented, they overlooked and they under acknowledged

Unknown Speaker  35:56  
so beyond Rosie's, so there's only one See male jail on Rikers Island called the rose and fitness center, and so beyond Rosie's, that is dubbed Rosie's, which is the nickname and so beyond Rosie's is a movement, a campaign movement that was started to not only shut up the female jail ahead of time, because for those who don't know, the Mayor de Blasio did agree to close Rikers Island. He started his plan and that should be shut down by 2026. Right. And so within this with saying there's only one female jail, let's close it down waiting for me. And let's get the women the necessary treatment and services and support that is needed. So beyond Rosie's 2020 is beyond Then shall we no longer want to call it a jail, we want to call it a wellness center because jail puts you in a box, it categorizes you

Unknown Speaker  37:14  
in a way that it allows us to press ourselves, right. And so beyond Rosie is bringing the women closing that jail down, opening up a wellness center, where women can receive not only mental health services, but substance abuse treatment, domestic violence, intimate partner violence, counseling, all of these things about and I'm not saying that the men don't need these things. Absolutely. But I'm a woman's advocate, so I'm not going to touch that. Okay. And so, with beyond Rosie's Now, we also not only talk about About shuttering the Rosen Senior Center, but also decarceration efforts where people are diverted into alternatives to incarceration

Unknown Speaker  38:15  
and alternatives to detention, rather than going through this eat long gated process to possibly get released anyway. Right. So there's the star version of programs that allow people to get the necessary help that is needed. So when you

Unknown Speaker  38:38  
if you

Unknown Speaker  38:38  
pull away people with addiction, if you pull away people that have defended themselves of the domestic violence, if you pull away the people that have bailed that under $2,000 if you pull away people that just smoke marijuana or take a pill to do They need to be the team or the cage like an animal or do they need the proper help? So we are moseys represents that as well as reinvestment into the community. So we have all of these service providers in the community that are lacking the necessary funds to pay staff adequately, be be able to get the necessary

Unknown Speaker  39:33  
contextual people to carry out the services that is needed. So instead of all these signs be put into detaining people. It can be put back into the community, so that the community can help because at the end of the day, the women as well as the men, they all come from a community and the same community be the ones that provide them the help. So this is what beyond those 2020 means just that vision. Right? And that vision is to one day be in a world where there isn't incarceration. We all believe in abolition, we all believe that there shouldn't be. Well, I don't know if we all because I'm not sure who sit in the audience. But

Unknown Speaker  40:27  
for the most part,

Unknown Speaker  40:28  
we all want to end mass incarceration. We all know that it's disproportionate that its marginalized communities that we know that some people people of privilege do not go through the system as those who are now let's call it for what it is. Right? I'm not going to sugarcoat it.

Unknown Speaker  40:54  
So beyond Rosie's represents the female population who are detain a great design.

Unknown Speaker  41:04  
And we are looking to reimagine. Repurpose

Unknown Speaker  41:15  
a world

Unknown Speaker  41:18  
that doesn't lock up women who are traumatized. What do we know about the women? over 80% of them?

Unknown Speaker  41:28  
We know that nearly 99 I'm gonna say 99% of the women on Rikers Island, have traumatic experiences in your background, whether from childhood to adulthood, adopted this childhood, no matter how you change it. They all have traumatic experiences. Right? Always. 70% of them have substance abuse. or some type of form of addiction. And so, with that said, we're talking about mothers who need who should be home with their children. And not let me just say this, that if you go to prison, you're going to find women.

Unknown Speaker  42:25  
If you go to a woman's prison, you're going to find women.

Unknown Speaker  42:35  
So the reality is when you incarcerate a woman,

Unknown Speaker  42:40  
you incarcerate a family when you're incarcerated. Unfortunately, you're incarcerated The man is the women now that are holding it down. Times have changed fellas. Song

Unknown Speaker  42:57  
but now the women of the world debt to households for the most part, they are the kids. They are the nurturers. They are the ones in school, they are the ones in the workforce. They are the ones home cooking for the kids, they are the ones doing the homework, they're the ones in the pulpit. So it's the women. If you nurture the women, if you invest in the women, then what you are investing in is yourself. Because the women is not only the backbone

Unknown Speaker  43:33  
there the back,

Unknown Speaker  43:35  
the front ends the side. That's right.

Unknown Speaker  43:39  
So this is the reality of might not agree some men I get it, because it's not for me. But for the most part, you know, you know, we always say these things that have women up with super women. Were we're so resilient with this publisher. has to be, we shouldn't have to be resilient because resilience is an action word. I shouldn't have to be strong because I shouldn't have to go through these traumatic experiences.

Unknown Speaker  44:18  
Right? So these are the things that when we talk about beyond 2020, we talk about any ending mass incarceration, that we need to talk about killing our communities. We need to talk about healing ourselves as people, we need to not overcome our traumatic experiences, but we need that

Unknown Speaker  44:45  
we need to go through we need so that we can rise above the oppression

Unknown Speaker  44:53  
this generational

Unknown Speaker  44:55  
oppression

Unknown Speaker  44:57  
that we now have come to depressed ourselves. And so we start looking at the things that we need to address from within.

Unknown Speaker  45:12  
Because when you heal yourself,

Unknown Speaker  45:16  
each one reach one. And when they say hurt people hurt people, heal people. And so

Unknown Speaker  45:24  
to start healing, they usually pass this on now to the children and whoever else is in your household. And it's

Unknown Speaker  45:34  
sold open and run out into the community, and then through the community, it will then become a society. But it starts with us, right? Because we have this thing where we carry this luggage with us in every relationship. In every household. It's everywhere we go, we copy this hurt this

Unknown Speaker  46:01  
Broken is broken people they do have nothing but

Unknown Speaker  46:06  
broken.

Unknown Speaker  46:10  
So if we heal on our own will help. But if we recognize that there were things within us that we need to start addressing, you know, the secrets, the things that we don't talk about the things that has happened to you, it doesn't matter what that is or how small you think it is, these things manifest into something much greater. So when we talk about mass incarceration

Unknown Speaker  46:46  
before we can become a collective,

Unknown Speaker  46:50  
we have to deal with each other

Unknown Speaker  46:53  
one

Unknown Speaker  46:57  
each one not only teaches Thank you.

Unknown Speaker  47:27  
Hi, everybody. Good afternoon.

Unknown Speaker  47:31  
It's me again, if you are sick of me yesterday, this sucks for you.

Unknown Speaker  47:36  
Apologies in advance.

Unknown Speaker  47:40  
I'm really honored to be part of the panel over here. Everybody in this panel is somebody I learned from regularly I respect greatly. So it's really a pleasure to be able to talk then you

Unknown Speaker  47:58  
my remarks are

Unknown Speaker  48:03  
going to be really focused on the work that I've been doing for the last few years with an organization that I co founded called surviving punished. So I'm going to use that organization work to kind of ground my remarks and my thoughts around the conversation about ending women's incarceration. Want to just start off by saying that when I use the term, women, I'm thinking about people who identify as women, both trans and non trans. And I also include folks who are gender non conforming in that particular kind of categorization. However, the facts are that when you think about the data that's out there very little data about the experiences of gender non conforming people who are incarcerated and criminalize. So we're really dealing with a lot of that information for those of you who are Researchers we need more information and more data. So that's something to keep in mind. I also want to kind of start off by saying that for me, I don't think you can really understand criminalization without century racialized, a kind of a racialized gendered analysis. We use quite a bit about the understanding of criminalization when we don't do that. And it will be very difficult for us to transform that to overcome that will recover from your vision without centering that analysis. So that's also partly what I will be talking about today. So let me begin with a letter to Governor Cuomo in New York. And it begins with dear Governor Cuomo, I had been ruled by read by convicted of and survived five minutes, my 23 year old my 23 year condition as a first time offender is directly Connected surviving Ismet partner violence, it is imperative that more consideration for community commutations begin to incarcerated survivors of domestic violence. I will be 72 upon my release about some relief from your office in the form of reduction. The dictionary defines a survivor as one who remains alive or existence who outlives or Outlast. I intend to continue to be a survivor. I am for you and your office and begin to grant commutations to survivors of intimate partner violence and father racial bias gender based violence who are in prisons throughout New York State. The current issue movement applies to many criminalized survivors. I challenge you and your office to refute what I am calling the two few. How many commutations have been granted on your watch too few Thank you, Cynthia.

Unknown Speaker  51:03  
Cynthia gallons is a survivor of three abusive relationships, including two marriages. The third relationship ended in the death of her abuser, for which she is serving a sentence of 23 years. She expresses tremendous, heartfelt remorse for action which resulted in his death, but it was a self defense action.

Unknown Speaker  51:26  
And, yeah, so I wanted to open with Cynthia's letter which you can find online at freedom, new york.com. And Cynthia is part of surviving punish. She's part of the freedom New York campaign. And I mentioned before that I co founded s&p in 2015. With my comrades who are part of the framework of the Alexander mobilization campaign, the free sandwich non key campaign, the court California Coalition for these prisoners and loving project, which at the time was called the Chicago Alliance to framers, Alexander. And you'll hear the names that of the folks who are part of the kind of original core group and those are folks who were criminalized for self defense, but also people who were criminalized for failure to protect their children. also people who are criminalized for Migration related issues. And so we came together nationally after having our individual defense campaigns as a way to kind of build more power together. And mentioned that impedes the National Coalition or formation that includes survivors, organizers that can advocates, legal advocates and attorneys, policy experts, scholars, currently and formerly incarcerated and criminalize people. As MP organizers to decriminalize efforts to survive the message in sexual violence just spoke to support and free criminalizing virus and abolish gender violence, policing prisons and deportations. We have affiliates in New York City in Chicago and California State Why? California and New York have a visiting program project that goes into the prisons and regularly visits our folks on the inside. As a New York has an inside outside newsletter that's created and built by both people on the inside and on the outside. We have a commissary working group that puts money on books for folks on the inside. We're currently fundraising for about trying to raise $10,000 you can help. We have a mass currency campaign that's called the freedom your campaign. We organized participatory defense campaigns and part part of what Emily brought up about the kind of history of defense campaigns in the 1970s. We take a lot of our kind of our kind of inspiration in the work of those radical feminist organizers of that here. So speaking of event celebrated Christina sharp looking the way they different than remark that care is the antidote to violence. Her words offer a powerful feminine strength wishes. Effective defense campaigns provide thousands of people with opportunities to demonstrate care for criminalized individuals to various topics, including letter writing, financial support, prison visits, and more. They connect people in a heartfelt direct way that teaches specific lessons about the brutality of prisons. And this can change people's experiences in the hearts and minds and that matters that's not the only thing that matters though. It also helps people develop a more radical politics of politics that issues the concepts of easy binary of they can perpetrators right.

Unknown Speaker  54:49  
And so it also forces us to understand that our fates are really interconnected. We rise across Jacko.

Unknown Speaker  54:57  
Defense campaigns

Unknown Speaker  54:58  
are guided by an epic and the Practice of care, which can be proud of, for me the core strategies about religion work, right? We care about conditions because we care about people. We demonstrate our care through various kinds of means. And this is that politic put into action in a really concrete specific way as I see it. So I mentioned this is a member of freedom, New York mass clemency campaign, we are calling and demanding immediate release of all survivors of violence and other forms,

Unknown Speaker  55:29  
including forms of gendered violence for in prison for their actions. And I want to just point out a few things that I'm going to use the rest of my time to do, which is use the limited time I have to share the common sense our work SNP seeks to find up end and these are some of the tenants that kind of grounded on organizing, also want to say something about, you know, kind of the listing the listicles everybody that is needs to be mentioned in these rooms and these spaces

Unknown Speaker  56:01  
FNP our work is to work with our folks and our folks are different people who have different life experiences. Some of them identify as women. And some of them identify as gender non conforming people. Some of them are folks who identify with disabled people and others don't, you know, are disabled and choose not to do that we work with sets for the people who see themselves their sex work as work and others who see themselves having the traffic. I don't really kind of get into defining what other people are in putting people into categories. I want people to come to whatever they're coming to you with how they define themselves, but also with an analysis of those things that have happened. So our work is really more about political education and coming into some understanding of our experiences rather than being rooted in identity as the thing that makes us understood in the world. And I do think that has to be consistently talked about in the face. Because just throwing out a word is not the same as incorporated into the analysis and experience that's going to be needed in order to overturn the structures and the forces that will practice like a side moment but like I really feel like that has to kind of need remarked upon on a regular basis. It's not to exclude people not to nature, but nature is not close to being enough. I think that's true.

Unknown Speaker  57:54  
So I mentioned before some of the basic tenants, the ground of organizing need to get in with the facts That all incarcerated people are survivors of violence. I subscribe to Danielle fairly common justice who was talked about earlier today a bit different view that no one can challenge for the first time by committing it, which means that everybody who has committed some form of arm was harmed at some point in time. It's a matter of degree. And it's not an excuse for having harm to people, but it is a reason. So this is an important thing to keep in mind. The next thing we base our work on is that many incarcerated people are survivors of racialized gender violence before they came into the system in any way. And multiple studies has has already been mentioned indicate that between 71 to 95% of incarcerated women in particular, from which we have data have experienced physical violence with an intimate partner may experience multiple multiple forms of physical sexual abuse and childhood and adults. trans and gender non conforming people have similar experiences with violence. As I mentioned before, the data on that skin.

Unknown Speaker  59:03  
Next, all incarcerated people are survivors of gender by gender violence wet and while they are locked up. This is important, right? This is because prison prison itself is a central organizer and producer of racialized gendered violence.

Unknown Speaker  59:19  
That means that gender violence is actually essential to the practice of incarceration. You cannot separate this stuff out, it is together as one thing.

Unknown Speaker  59:31  
The prison abuses and violates people by design, right? The dynamics mirror interpersonal forms of domestic and sexual violence. This is a feature it's not about the prison is as I mentioned, yesterday, the team again contempt with serial rapist in and of itself, when we send people to prison, were sentencing them to judicial rape.

Unknown Speaker  59:54  
Criminal motivation, criminalization is inherently sexual violence isn't simply co constituted. Sexual Violence is the announcement of gender violence. Think of the routine strip searches

Unknown Speaker  1:00:06  
that take place in spaces. prisoners, of course subjected to the facilities where the people enter the spaces that are personal to visit those folks. Right? Think about the lawsuits being filed against Rikers for sexually molesting people who are coming to visit their loved ones, those people who are disproportionately targets about half into the black women, because we're the ones who visit people disproportionately. Right? So this is incredibly important. We're thinking about gender and gender works

Unknown Speaker  1:00:35  
or doesn't work

Unknown Speaker  1:00:36  
within the system. cavity searches of people driving their own cars as part of policing, the sexual violation of pat down streets stop and frisk by rigidly enforcing the gender binary people who are imprisoned and criminalize, do not conform to the existing norms of gender expression in prison presentation on isolated you know, punish the targeted and short the number of ways that gendered violence is deployed and maintained by prisons and jails is endless. gender based violence is reproduced and maintained by by criminalization.

Unknown Speaker  1:01:09  
As SNP co founder, Dr. Lisa Vieira suggests, our political strategies must recognize that racialized gendered violence and state violence we're not isolated or oppositional, or pinchable to each other. gender based violence has been enforced by agents of state violence and institutionalized in the form of prisons, jails, but as well as in wage, poverty rates, service agencies reporting to protect children by punishing mothers. Therefore, to end gender violence must end globalization.

Unknown Speaker  1:01:41  
Prison is not feminist.

Unknown Speaker  1:01:45  
President is not feminist oppression and domination. For me Our main features of the chick on the ice Charlie function suggests suggested feminism, a political perspective is about change in structures, about ending domination and resist the oppression by this definition is in of themselves, prisons cannot be feminist. Why? Because prisons actually are not about ending domination, but they're not doing it. And they're not about resisting oppression, but actually oppressing people, right? So it is not the stuff that makes Semitism incompatible with being pro carceral punishment, all that stuff out that so stop calling yourself feminist and then saying you're pro prism. That's Marion's message from the day.

Unknown Speaker  1:02:37  
We cannot focus on addressing vulnerabilities, which is always racialized is always gender which always had on women. So focus on criminalized providers of violence pushes us to answer how do we create safety outside of parcel logics? That is the question that we have pushed out from the center, criminalize survivors.

Unknown Speaker  1:02:58  
We can strive to an abolition stablishing Feminism which is the libertarian vision of a world free from all forms of violence, including principles produced by parcel logics and systems of surveillance, punishment, cooperation and global militarism. We have worked for many years now, with major collaborators that you work with different kinds of people may include the free parts project in Tennessee that works with incarcerated criminalized survivors. Free Chi Peterson that is working with the champ fans incarcerated in Georgia are defending themselves against their request, free initial Walker and support codes that works with supporting incarcerated sex workers who are survivors and fighting back for their own, you know, lives and survival and being criminalized for that. We're constantly trying to be interested in coalition work with other people who are also trying to push against this, and I don't think we can, we're not going to be able to pull this mental energy thing until we start understanding that by focusing on racialized, gendered and racialized, gendered violence, and by addressing that you're opening up a different way of thinking about criminalization. criminalization, as Sharon pointed out becomes something that we're looking at as a community problem, a family come home and individual problem and a societal problem. And the very specific lens that we use to be able to understand that is what's going to give us the answer to be able to dismantle masculinization so thank you very much.

Unknown Speaker  1:04:46  
Want to apologize it's such a shock panel. I know we get absolutely.

Unknown Speaker  1:04:55  
10 to 12 minutes, I have a list of questions that are Prepare for these panelists. However, I know the audience would prefer to ask your questions so we can say maybe three questions from the audience if you have something burning to ask will

Unknown Speaker  1:05:11  
step up to the mic.

Unknown Speaker  1:05:12  
Anyone have any questions for the pound?

Unknown Speaker  1:05:20  
Oh excellent.

Unknown Speaker  1:05:42  
mentioned

Unknown Speaker  1:05:50  
and spoke about this aspect of

Unknown Speaker  1:05:57  
speaking about that

Unknown Speaker  1:06:01  
And I wanted to ask whether

Unknown Speaker  1:06:04  
that use of the penal colony term is

Unknown Speaker  1:06:06  
coming specifically because it isn't an island and it's insular sort of geography, or whether this this model, considering carpel space as part of colonial expansion is something that we should also be considering when we think about the ways in which Rural Development

Unknown Speaker  1:06:29  
economic plan,

Unknown Speaker  1:06:31  
our premise on hope is build a prison. That's probably an exhibition, or, you know, this is something I've been thinking about, I guess, given the the presentation by Dr. Tommy Burton yesterday about the prison as a form of domestic warfare

Unknown Speaker  1:06:49  
and

Unknown Speaker  1:06:50  
tied together because abolition

Unknown Speaker  1:06:54  
and as follows

Unknown Speaker  1:07:02  
Prison precincts and neighborhoods are analogous to military

Unknown Speaker  1:07:06  
occupations overseas. And I suppose I just wanted to

Unknown Speaker  1:07:09  
kind of unpack, you know, the usage of the penal colony here in the US.

Unknown Speaker  1:07:15  
And this coming from my own studies and

Unknown Speaker  1:07:19  
my dissertation to myself,

Unknown Speaker  1:07:43  
I would say I would say I want to spend a little time with all the above, you know, all the above

Unknown Speaker  1:07:50  
everything that you say

Unknown Speaker  1:07:53  
Why?

Unknown Speaker  1:07:57  
You know, something that we really

Unknown Speaker  1:08:04  
out for what it is, right? So the same way the prison

Unknown Speaker  1:08:12  
you need to release your speaking and recognize it for what it is.

Unknown Speaker  1:08:24  
So we're going to actually take

Unknown Speaker  1:08:25  
all three of these questions so you can stick to a question and then secondly, the

Unknown Speaker  1:08:32  
timelines comment. Thank you so much. So

Unknown Speaker  1:08:46  
you mentioned it to the need for data around the country.

Unknown Speaker  1:08:53  
Something I've been thinking about,

Unknown Speaker  1:08:54  
obviously, just came from the university

Unknown Speaker  1:09:00  
Don't shake the trust system, but

Unknown Speaker  1:09:06  
for real need in our society

Unknown Speaker  1:09:10  
because he can be

Unknown Speaker  1:09:11  
promised. So

Unknown Speaker  1:09:14  
what do you think would be the best venue?

Unknown Speaker  1:09:19  
Good watch. The

Unknown Speaker  1:09:26  
second question.

Unknown Speaker  1:09:34  
So my question today

Unknown Speaker  1:09:41  
My question is

Unknown Speaker  1:09:43  
about prisons incarceration. What do you imagine beyond the physical not

Unknown Speaker  1:09:52  
having accountability and Thank you for

Unknown Speaker  1:10:12  
sharing and thank you all for your words.

Unknown Speaker  1:10:19  
imagination, and we

Unknown Speaker  1:10:22  
can leverage limitations I just want to share

Unknown Speaker  1:10:27  
or

Unknown Speaker  1:10:30  
I also

Unknown Speaker  1:10:31  
love with this conference if they have any questions you can answer let's tweet out. continue our

Unknown Speaker  1:10:47  
last question.

Unknown Speaker  1:10:50  
Hi, thanks so much for being here.

Unknown Speaker  1:10:56  
Come up through the last couple days have been the word socialism, curious about how to stand,

Unknown Speaker  1:11:05  
humanism and what the role of the state can be.

Unknown Speaker  1:11:12  
Excellent.

Unknown Speaker  1:11:14  
We'll start with the first one.

Unknown Speaker  1:11:18  
paraphrase the need for data around incarceration where people have either on the roadblocks or your need for data.

Unknown Speaker  1:11:29  
So, yeah, I think I brought up the need I think there are there's some data available around kind of lesbian, gay, bisexual stuff that that's kind of has a history there you can find that what's missing is gender non conforming and specifically trans experience

Unknown Speaker  1:11:46  
data

Unknown Speaker  1:11:48  
of folks of course rated their self that's coming out and most of it is actually coming out from non affiliated with academic spaces and sources, but still not enough to actually be able to tell a story. So I, you know, I don't do my work. I don't do my research within a university setting though, right now I'm affiliated with, technically with university for a couple of years, I've always done participatory action research outside of that space. And that data has been used by academics inside those spaces and policymakers and other people like that. I think you have to be able to find other people and make your own thing. I'm a big believer in making your own thing. You know, Angie and I have made our own interrupting or motivation, research a national institution. That's our own thing. You know, what I mean? And like the data we're producing is coming from our knowledge and our information. The The issue is to be good at doing data analysis, get good at being a researcher, worry about the rest later. So you know, find other people who can help support you in that. So

Unknown Speaker  1:13:00  
Say something quick about this to credit

Unknown Speaker  1:13:04  
is and she and I are from California surviving punished have been working on a project that involves both like in person focus groups and convenings with formerly incarcerated survivors and California, but then also a survey that went to the women's prisons. And so, you know, that's an example of where a few of us are University affiliated, but then we're part of a research collaborative that independent from the agendas of any given institution and gotten very little money for the day. So there's that, but so I think that's another model. It's just thinking about, you know, in this case, it's been important that some of the members of that team have been trained and particular kinds of research methods and then can, you know, use those methods

Unknown Speaker  1:14:01  
The role of the state

Unknown Speaker  1:14:02  
and potentially socialist future. And then question about accountability. How do you enforce accountability and the language that enforce

Unknown Speaker  1:14:17  
accountability?

Unknown Speaker  1:14:20  
You all have things that you want to

Unknown Speaker  1:14:27  
say. First, you don't want to diminish.

Unknown Speaker  1:14:34  
So there are but

Unknown Speaker  1:14:39  
we also need to understand

Unknown Speaker  1:14:48  
what happened.

Unknown Speaker  1:14:50  
You know,

Unknown Speaker  1:14:51  
when it comes to actually

Unknown Speaker  1:14:55  
wakes up and says, Hey,

Unknown Speaker  1:15:01  
Nobody

Unknown Speaker  1:15:04  
traumatic experiences,

Unknown Speaker  1:15:08  
experiences that lead up to the anger. So I feel that would

Unknown Speaker  1:15:18  
that can be held accountable, right? Because any rate if you're

Unknown Speaker  1:15:28  
coming out of your house

Unknown Speaker  1:15:32  
that's being held accountable. When you're in a place

Unknown Speaker  1:15:38  
you're unable to have some kind of freedom of choice. And so, this whole process, one thing that happens to the court process is that they don't look at all of the content that leads up to that. A person should not be defined by worsens that they have done,

Unknown Speaker  1:16:04  
you know, in

Unknown Speaker  1:16:07  
a domestic violence situation.

Unknown Speaker  1:16:11  
Right? So I asked to get

Unknown Speaker  1:16:14  
a broken jaw.

Unknown Speaker  1:16:17  
I didn't ask

Unknown Speaker  1:16:19  
when this man attempted to finally

Unknown Speaker  1:16:24  
there was a bit of anger, to say, nobody's going to finally that's going to hurt me without permission. Right? So that that comes from Trump that has not been treated.

Unknown Speaker  1:16:45  
And I wound up in

Unknown Speaker  1:16:48  
my life. And so

Unknown Speaker  1:16:49  
in

Unknown Speaker  1:16:50  
all these other cases, especially with the

Unknown Speaker  1:16:55  
trauma traumatic

Unknown Speaker  1:16:58  
experience, So we need to come to commit some of these crimes. Right? This is driving force. So, yeah, they shouldn't be some level of accountability, but also to, I think that the city, the state, and federal all and accountability to a person, looking at them as an individual, looking at the history, not just for that moment of what happened

Unknown Speaker  1:17:34  
to what happened.

Unknown Speaker  1:17:39  
This is really important. We use a lot of words in a lot of terms. We use accountability when we really need punishment. I'm not saying that's what the person was asking about. In fact, I think they were asking for something different. I want to say that accountability is not actually something you impose on other people.

Unknown Speaker  1:17:56  
An internal resource that tells you by wrong That's what accountability actually is, which means we can't hold anybody else accountable. We can hold ourselves accountable. That's all we can do. You can hold space for people to figure out whether they want to take accountability for what they've done. This is a very different conceptualization of what we're talking about is the P IC is about coercion. The work we do can't then be coercive. Right? Right. This means that we're going to be very unhappy. Because the question of people choosing to take accountability means agency and choice.

Unknown Speaker  1:18:43  
And some people will choose not to take accountability for particular kinds of behaviors and actions. And that would mean a collective decision making process over time that we come to for how we deal with that. But if we could get clear from the very beginning on what these things really needed, you get less frustrated. Because when you realize that you cannot hold other people accountable, This changes everything. The lens to which you interact with relationships, you must build change, who is the person who needs to be part of holding the space so somebody can take accountable. I don't know you and I sit across from you and I tell you to take accountability to change your behavior, you're likely not to do it. This means that somebody who knows you is more likely to be the person who shouldn't do that. Yet we live in a culture where many, many people are permissively, allowing people who do harm they know to do it without intervention. That's right. So first move is for all of us. You need to be where we are with our own people. That's right, to make sure they take accountability, not that we make them accountable. That is that there's a there's a shift in that there's a shift in that that has to occur. So the last thing I want to say about this is it there's an unspoken thing In these phases all the time, which is that the worst possible thing that can happen to you is to be raped.

Unknown Speaker  1:20:08  
And so like,

Unknown Speaker  1:20:09  
if we can't deal with rape

Unknown Speaker  1:20:14  
or rape

Unknown Speaker  1:20:16  
can't have that conversation that we can have morals without prisons, policing and surveillance, and the work of overwhelmingly black, brown, indigenous Latina people. Trans john, trans people have been to take the sector, sexual violence and harm in our discussion about transformative justice

Unknown Speaker  1:20:44  
is building that model, but people are directly impacted or raped themselves. We're having these conversations with some of you. This is something for out there and evolution to self

Unknown Speaker  1:20:58  
harm. Whether it's a crime or not,

Unknown Speaker  1:21:04  
the unit of analysis we care about is how do we attend to that? How can you transform that? And because people

Unknown Speaker  1:21:16  
want to hear people tell me that I haven't thought through sexual violence.

Unknown Speaker  1:21:30  
Guess what rape is I'm not locked up behind bars,

Unknown Speaker  1:21:42  
in our family, in our communities in our workplaces right now. Stop the bullshitting and stop the line.

Unknown Speaker  1:21:54  
Of course we care. That's all the work we've been doing for how many years Hey,

Unknown Speaker  1:22:05  
we'll talk with anybody who said to me one of the reasons

Unknown Speaker  1:22:09  
he asked me a question about how you can keep yourself safe.

Unknown Speaker  1:22:14  
And I say, Well, yeah. And I say, Well, how do you keep yourself safe right now?

Unknown Speaker  1:22:20  
engage in a real conversation that is about the fact that you're scared and fear. And I understand. But it's not somebody else's job to take care of all of our job.

Unknown Speaker  1:22:35  
So it's not my job to

Unknown Speaker  1:22:37  
give you the solution.

Unknown Speaker  1:22:39  
There is no solution. There is a collective solution over time, and there are many solutions, because the point of the present is that it's a hammer, a nail. And what we need are multiple ways of addressing problems, because we know that one way is not the right way and can't adjust them and I have to say that the underlying That sometimes

Unknown Speaker  1:23:03  
often does not, which is that there are certain things you're just not going to be able to handle. And then those things have a hierarchy of the worst possible thing that can happen to you. And by the way, getting raped is very horrifying.

Unknown Speaker  1:23:18  
Okay, it's not a great thing to have half of that. But that is not the key of my identity.

Unknown Speaker  1:23:25  
And many other things in a bad, separate series of bad things happen to me. Right? And so I just want us to like, breathe a little bit

Unknown Speaker  1:23:35  
and realize that this show is going to take a while for us to come to good answers for that it is not one thing that's going to make a difference. And it is not one person who has to come up with the answer, but every single person in this room

Unknown Speaker  1:23:50  
makes sense.

Transcribed by https://otter.ai
