Unknown Speaker  0:16  
Thank you everybody for being here for our panel discussion.

Unknown Speaker  0:22  
Before we get started with our actual conversation, I just wanted to do some brief intros

Unknown Speaker  0:34  
for our members here today. Starting on the far left we have Andy Eisen. Any ice is the CO director of the Community Education Project, a higher education and prison program located in Daytona, Florida. Isaac is the coordinator for the program's public history research collective and a visiting assistant professor of history at Stetson University.

Unknown Speaker  0:59  
Next, we have

Unknown Speaker  1:00  
Elizabeth Nelson Elizabeth Nelson PhD has coordinated the Indiana women's prison history project since January of 2018. And is an assistant professor of medical humanities and Health Studies at Indiana University Purdue University Indianapolis also known as I up

Unknown Speaker  1:19  
then we have

Unknown Speaker  1:23  
honest as honest as I is an activist, artist and graduate student in the medical humanities and Health Studies Program at IEP y. In 2013, she co founded the Indiana women's prison History Project, a group of currently and formerly incarcerated women who published original research on the history of women and incarceration. She received the 2016 Gloria ontology level award from the American Studies Association for her work in gender and sexuality, and is the recipient of the outstanding History Project award presented by the Indiana Historical Society. Her words

Unknown Speaker  2:00  
can hear the span multiple media sources including NPR and Slate Magazine. She is the co author of the play the Duchess of st town, which has been produced in multiple theaters nationwide.

Unknown Speaker  2:13  
Finally, we have mollywood mollywood. It is an undergraduate history major at Indiana University Purdue University kannapolis ip what Her research focuses on women in the carceral state and the use of incarceration as a eugenics tactic to suppress female sexuality. She is a member of the Indiana women's prison history project, and is currently working on your contribution to a collective manuscript with gender and sexual violence an epidemic injustice as it seems soon to be published by the new press. She's also researching and reporting on the barriers faced while trying to attain higher education by incarcerated and post incarcerated individuals for the Lumina Foundation.

Unknown Speaker  3:03  
Can I introduce you?

Unknown Speaker  3:06  
I'd like to introduce Monica deck, who is doing really great work with us just started in August as an assistant for the Indiana women's prison History Project. She's also an undergraduate medical humanities major at IU, I

Unknown Speaker  3:25  
say performer and a writer and just all around talented human. And her age did not end up on the program, which is completely my fault. So I apologize. I couldn't do it.

Unknown Speaker  3:45  
So Monica has agreed to moderate it for us today. So I will turn it over to you.

Unknown Speaker  3:53  
So before we begin our discussion, which just to let you know the way we're going to do this, we have some great

Unknown Speaker  4:00  
Practice Questions that I'm going to present to our panel. And they will have a conversation and answering them. And then once we are done with the directed questions, then you will have about a 15 minute period for audience q&a. And we very much look forward to your questions, so please have them ready to writing them down as we're talking. But before we do that, I really want to highlight the fact that I know it was mentioned in the video. But we have several members of our respective teams who cannot be here today due to the circumstances of their personal institutions. And I would like to acknowledge them before we begin for the Community Education Project. We have Antonio, can we stop up Mercury, Pete and Roger who could not be with us today? From the Indiana women's prison history project. We have Laura, Nicole, ran, Natalie and Lisa, who were unable to join us today.

Unknown Speaker  4:58  
All right.

Unknown Speaker  5:00  
First question, everybody.

Unknown Speaker  5:03  
I want to preface this question by saying the last time we had this discussion, we were at the national conference for higher education, which is, demand is obviously a very different environment than the environment in which we're all talking and listening and learning right now.

Unknown Speaker  5:19  
So, we're doing a little bit of work to reframe our discussion in the context of this environment. So what I want to ask all of our researchers and our facilitators is particularly for our researchers,

Unknown Speaker  5:35  
do you see your work as activism? And if so, how, and then for our facilitators and leaders, how do you conceptualize your work in your role within that activist lens?

Unknown Speaker  5:55  
Good afternoon, everybody.

Unknown Speaker  5:57  
Okay, so initially

Unknown Speaker  6:00  
did not realize that my work but anything to do with that I was in the story and that's what I wanted to do. I didn't see outside of that. I shifted my research to the Indiana school for feeble minded us

Unknown Speaker  6:17  
a couple years ago, and once I did that, I started

Unknown Speaker  6:24  
finding out things that had never been reported on about women who were segregated there for the whole of their childbearing years. So, practically a life sentence. They have never committed crimes. They did not get their due process, no trial.

Unknown Speaker  6:44  
Just just sent their due to a judge and a doctor's opinion of them. So I became outraged as a woman as a US citizen as

Unknown Speaker  6:57  
a previously incarcerated person who

Unknown Speaker  7:00  
I didn't even spend a fraction of the time that they did.

Unknown Speaker  7:05  
And so I needed to share their story with everyone I needed to be a voice for them a voice of power for them, and not only to just expose what had happened to them, but to also

Unknown Speaker  7:24  
to also let them receive the acknowledgement that they should be receiving for the part that they took in the women's suffrage movement, whether they knew that they did or not. They very much did. So I started feeling like an activist once I started really diving into all that and sharing what I was doing.

Unknown Speaker  7:49  
And smelling

Unknown Speaker  7:52  
everything about every breath of my life is activism. So it's hard to see anything I'm doing is being anything but that

Unknown Speaker  8:00  
On the flip side of Molly's story of Molly's equation, and as you heard me say in the video, I did not consider myself a historian at all, I considered myself an activism activists. So how does an activist then figure out how to how they're framing their work in history in relation to activism. And so for me that's kind of in multiple different lenses. For one and probably the most baseline of why was I saying I'm not a historian, because what do we think of when we think of historians? We think the white man's history, right, because that's the history we get, and I'm certainly not that. And so, as an activist and activist historian, I'm not telling the history of all the other people who didn't get to get their history told and that includes my current life and my current circumstances, because we don't know the history of other women. Much like myself. The thing, Lynn

Unknown Speaker  9:00  
How can we even begin to conceptualize and understand and combat the problems that women have to they're having? We can't. So it's important for me now to reveal that hidden in that last history and recover those lost in those suppressed voices so that we can figure out how in the hell we got to the problem or any Sunday. On the secondary level of got. It is the challenge of who is the knower and who is the credible source and which testimonies do we give validity and credence to? Who are we paying attention to? And who are we completely dismissing? More specifically because my work focuses on the medicalization and gender and sexual violence of women, which bodies are being used to gain knowledge but are not considered knowledge producers in and of themselves. And, you know, I could go on and on and on about this, but

Unknown Speaker  10:00  
I'll leave it there. That's just two points of how my work exactly.

Unknown Speaker  10:11  
So I wanted to ask one clarifying question before. And this feeds into something. I've heard you talk about the episode of stealing a quote from you. I'm sorry.

Unknown Speaker  10:22  
I have heard Andy say a few times that the one double fist up at the microphones here.

Unknown Speaker  10:31  
Stop doing.

Unknown Speaker  10:34  
Sorry. I'm an excellent moderator, I swear

Unknown Speaker  10:39  
that the act of research in itself is subversive. And so I know that there are some comments from researchers on your team that you would like to associate with that statement. And then um, I also think it does kind of feed into your question of how do you conceptualize your roles as facilitators of this research.

Unknown Speaker  11:03  
So before begin next one, the fake Derek Felder, of course, for all this work for inviting us here. Such an honor and a privilege to be able to be on the stage with these brilliant folks and to share with you all the work of researchers Education Project.

Unknown Speaker  11:22  
Antonio leaves on the film prepared some brief remarks about how, essentially how he sees his research as activism. So, I'd like to read those. Now. He writes, according to mersa J. Fuentes, the author of dispossessed lives, enslaved persons are silenced in the archives, but the narrative is told by their recorders, they are not allowed to tell their own stories, the quote, violent systems and structures of white supremacy created devastating images and quote, of enslaved people that erased them and lead to their social death. What we want

Unknown Speaker  12:00  
We can know about them as limited by what and how those in power decided to document about them. In a previous conference paper, I mentioned that I was drawn to the public history research collective, because of the similarities between enslavement and modern incarceration. Thinking of this lightness within the context of more so when cases discussion of the archives has led me to a deeper motivation for partaking in this project, my desire my desire to bump against the narrative, almost on me by the penal system. Since my incarceration two decades ago, my footprint on society has ceased. Instead, my life has been lived within the legal and correctional archives. The legal archive began with my arrest and my mugshot. I then made a brief appearance in court records. Since then, certain aspects of my life have been documented on my contact card, a record of minor infractions kept in my dormitory, Officer station, and disciplinary record within the Florida Department of Corrections database, the department

Unknown Speaker  13:00  
Does not record positive activities other than educational and vocational programs from which lifers are largely excluded. My achievements as a self directed learner and my personal growth are completely ignored by these archives. I have heard of prisoners stand for parole and clemency boards with squeaky clean disciplinary records and shiny resumes of program completions. Only to have those achievements considered suspect as a convicted felon serving life sentence serving a life sentence. How will my story be told by a historian searching through available records decades from now, as a lifer is expected that I will not have anything meaningful to contribute to society or academia. The Florida Department of Corrections suspects that men like me are either violent gang members. Up until earlier this year I was listed as a member of a security threat group because of the sergeants claim that I limited membership him or a drug user. The department routinely administers random drug test my decision to avoid

Unknown Speaker  14:00  
drug use violence and gang membership are directly related to my desire to find my identity against the expectations of corrections professionals. My pursuit of higher education through self directed studies, and now as a Stetson see he's doing is integral to myself definition, my submission for academic conferences and article for process history and work on the public history research collectively exhibit of the spring garden plantation, or opportunities to lead my own trace and academic and public archives and expand the narratives that may be told about being the negative eagle and correctional archives. What I while I can't extricate myself from the prison industrial complex, I am challenging the narratives that are propagated by it.

Unknown Speaker  14:50  
And so, the second part of the question, what is my role?

Unknown Speaker  14:55  
Kind of doing it? I'm providing providing resources to folks

Unknown Speaker  15:00  
Like Antonio, or brilliant,

Unknown Speaker  15:02  
who have so much human capacity that is stolen by the carceral system, using our universities

Unknown Speaker  15:11  
and repurpose in them.

Unknown Speaker  15:14  
And that's essentially, and then get out of their way and listen to the work they're doing.

Unknown Speaker  15:22  
Yeah, I just like to second that, like the sense of support role. And,

Unknown Speaker  15:29  
you know, I see myself essentially as a water bear, in that, you know, I try to bring as much nourishment in the form of resources to these women who are warriors and who are, you know, changing the world. So, that's how you can see from what I'm doing.

Unknown Speaker  15:47  
And so, to expand on that and in ways that I have heard, all of you discuss is this idea of India, stealing another one of your quotes is

Unknown Speaker  16:00  
You said we are here because they are doing the work, they are doing this work. And

Unknown Speaker  16:06  
so I'd love to hear from everyone on the panel a little bit more about

Unknown Speaker  16:13  
the importance of local histories, particularly local histories of incarceration and slavery and other modes of institutionalization as well as the unavoidable irony of doing that kind of work in a heavily structured punitive institution.

Unknown Speaker  16:38  
Okay, so

Unknown Speaker  16:43  
repeat it was like three of them.

Unknown Speaker  16:50  
So, the idea of the importance of local history, as well as the unavoidable irony of documenting industry

Unknown Speaker  17:00  
We have these punitive institutions and these segregated facilities doing that research from the inside.

Unknown Speaker  17:10  
So first of all,

Unknown Speaker  17:14  
it's we started as a history project, because when you want to talk about what is happening to us as women as incarcerated women, and you are incarcerated yourself, you know the backlash on speaking out against the administration is going to be heavy. So you have to find a loophole to get that that and the History Project served as that afternoon and then it led into an amazing

Unknown Speaker  17:47  
I don't even know it just opened up we could use like he was saying, we all know that history is written by the winners by white male by in our system

Unknown Speaker  18:00  
Our captors, for example, I have spent years poring over thousands and thousands and thousands of pages about the school about the border state charities. And I have yet to find one single scrap of anything that has this power of women's voice in it, nothing. That's insane. It's all there. It's all

Unknown Speaker  18:26  
the administration's the characters, voice opinion policies, it's all about them. So what we can do is use our lived experience to give voice to other marginalized people that, you know, we're busting into history as marginalized people, which is not what is usually the case and we're giving voice to the other women who have not had it at all. So we're able to speak for ourselves without speaking for ourselves and having to work

Unknown Speaker  19:00  
You're about

Unknown Speaker  19:02  
getting punished for it. And then once we get out, you know, it opens up avenues for many career opportunities, opportunities to network with brilliant minds. I love being here. I love coming to conferences, getting to just soak up everything that everyone has to say, because we all have different perspectives. And I just need to add real quick you guys were way too humble of your roles.

Unknown Speaker  19:33  
This is what needs to happen. If you aren't sure how to be an activist what what you can do to help these people that come in there and give their time and their resources and their energy and their knowledge to people who are incarcerated to give us the opportunity to not only prove to the world, that we're not the stereotype what you proved ourselves because trauma really damages

Unknown Speaker  20:00  
deals is everything within yourself you guys make that happen for us and without you were okay I can't speak for everybody where would I you made all the difference in the rest of my life you Yes, I work hard and I do the work but you just showed me the way so you guys really need to give yourselves

Unknown Speaker  20:23  
a whole life

Unknown Speaker  20:33  
so I'm gonna make sure I'm talking about you know public history why this is important. You know we embarked upon the History Project thinking we were going to further the nice pretty fluffy bunny tale story of the about these amazing Quaker feminists performers and how they saved these ladies. Thank God for these women who just ended the sexual violence of

Unknown Speaker  21:00  
Women who were incarcerated inside men's institutions. And yeah, clearly we should have known better because that obviously isn't our current experience and while we were living with, but you know what, so what we find is that how skewed some of these stories are and how history has had this impeccable way of lionizing certain people and then vilifying other people. And here's some, you know, and if you don't know this, you're probably still lying to yourself. Every single person is the victor and also the perpetrator. There is nobody who is exempt from having done harm to another human being in some fashion, whether it was intentional or unintentional. People are people and then how do people go and harvest more people and it becomes this ugly vicious cycle that just doesn't that so, you know, here are these women in history that we looked at like these great feminists making great strides.

Unknown Speaker  22:00  
For women, but they were doing that at the sacrifice of other women. They were doing that by emulating the very same systems of power and control that their male predecessors had done. And so public history is important because we need this multi varied perspective to understand how and why you're living with the situations we're living with in contemporary society. So talking about gender and sexual violence of women in prison and contemporary times. Molly's absolutely correct. It is not safe for us to talk about our direct experience. But the other thing that I noticed was I had a difficult time understanding why my direct lived experience was the way it was. I had no understanding at all whatsoever of why in the modern female penal institution, sexuality was so highly

Unknown Speaker  23:01  
A woman displaying in the form of sexuality or what they could even conceive of or try to bring appropriate as sexual was the most criminalized thing inside the person. I literally went to lock from another woman touching a bracelet on my hand on my packet as Antonio is talking about, this is what the Department of Corrections will lead as the footprint of us historically, they call that my sexy

Unknown Speaker  23:30  
a sex act, a woman touching a bracelet on my hand was a sex that I was sent to solitary confinement and lost 120 days of good time for another woman putting a kiss on my cheek, another sex act. But sometimes I would watch other women in the space around me, committed horrific instances of violence against each other

Unknown Speaker  23:59  
and they did not

Unknown Speaker  24:00  
solitary confinement, they did not lose good time. So I would challenge the system and I would say, Are you trying to tell me that one human being kissing another human being?

Unknown Speaker  24:14  
deserves 120 days in prison. We put this in dollars and cents people because this is the capitalist system. And that's why we're doing this $65 a day minimum baseline for the taxpayer to house me in prison for 120 days because somebody decided to put a kiss on my cheek. This is real life shift. And I had no understanding of why he says, but when I got into the history, and I started digging up the history of women's prisons and women's institution and institutionalizing women, the baseline foundation from the very beginning

Unknown Speaker  25:00  
was to suppress female sexuality. And suddenly it became crystal clear of why it was so demanding for somebody to touch my hand or kiss my cheek. And this is why it's important to tell these stories so we can understand how in the hell did we get to the madness we're currently living in?

Unknown Speaker  25:21  
Well, I, I really, I agree with you. And what I want to say about that is there were a couple of things that I was hearing as you were speaking.

Unknown Speaker  25:32  
There's this idea of time last time that I want to tie back to you in a minute based on other topics of discussion and I know you feel passionate about

Unknown Speaker  25:43  
but also this idea. We've been talking a lot in this conference about criminalization and how it happens. And

Unknown Speaker  25:52  
there is value in while we look forward and we talk about how we change and

Unknown Speaker  26:00  
How we redefine

Unknown Speaker  26:03  
and eliminate these ideas of criminalisation

Unknown Speaker  26:07  
history absolutely shows us not only how we got there, but also the cycles in which is perpetuated and reproduced, imitated, and that it really just happens in different is the same thing happening in different shapes and forms throughout the centuries.

Unknown Speaker  26:26  
But you said something really, in there talking about the last time and it's going back to a conversation. I know that happened between you and me last night and it's this idea of

Unknown Speaker  26:38  
that last time those forgotten times and thinking about the meaning of that time, does it have meaning and how being involved in projects like this while in a carceral institution where

Unknown Speaker  26:56  
we want to, you know, while overall we want to break down those walls

Unknown Speaker  27:00  
And dismantle the system but within it while we are in it that that is the current context. How do we bring the meeting to those days? How do we maintain a life when a Department of Corrections just sees a body? And that personally for me coming into this project has been one of the most regulatory things I've seen, this is a is this idea of meaning making and the way that people inside spend their time. So

Unknown Speaker  27:30  
is there a clear question here?

Unknown Speaker  27:34  
I can pick up on that or just to say, you know, going back to the very early, you know, particular question about my role and all of that, you know, I think it was Elizabeth Hinton mentioned, you know, communities of care, and I do

Unknown Speaker  27:48  
aim to achieve something akin to that, in trying to carve out make space for this project to happen both inside and outside

Unknown Speaker  27:59  
the prison.

Unknown Speaker  28:00  
And,

Unknown Speaker  28:01  
and, you know, I can't speak for anyone's experience but in terms of my, my girl, like I feel this kind of life force that is there in the classroom. And, you know, in terms of, you know, the contradictions and paradoxes of doing this in not only in the space of prison but also you know, I'm position that in university, also a problem, problematic institution, as we've been discussing. And you know, I just, I see myself as doing my best to subvert and exploit those systems. For example, now that I am an assistant professor, I have access to

Unknown Speaker  28:51  
resources that I didn't have before, and just trying to dig those things up and make them available to these researchers.

Unknown Speaker  29:00  
Using my, you know, credentials and strategic ways, that sort of thing, right.

Unknown Speaker  29:07  
And then in terms of

Unknown Speaker  29:10  
subverting the landscape, that

Unknown Speaker  29:15  
is the prison system. We were talking recently about the importance of local histories. Our projects are very different, because they're looking at very specific sites. originality, is important. So when you while you see continuity is over time, it's also important to make differentiations between what's happening demographically and regionally in different sites. Each site has its own story. And as we see more and more people being interested in starting projects like this around the country, I think we can see ourselves with this kind of suffering, the sea is growth and presence. You know, they are everywhere, but

Unknown Speaker  30:00  
Students inside that we're starting to, you know, from that location, excavate those local stories, things that are overlooked currently, and can really change, you know, the entire state knowledge.

Unknown Speaker  30:17  
And so just following up on this question of the power of local histories to tell broader stories, I think there for me as an educator, it's one way that I've been able to bring in an anti racist pedagogy into the prison.

Unknown Speaker  30:32  
Specifically, because it's one thing if I'm teaching a class and I'm lecturing about the topic, but it's much different when you have white, black and Latino men working together. History that is one of white settler colonialism, that is trying to understand slavery and

Unknown Speaker  30:52  
the different ways in which violence and forms all that history and then at the same time, telling a story that local

Unknown Speaker  31:00  
People don't know. So this project on our end began when I was talking about this local plantation that is now a theme park. He saw the waterskiing elephants, right, that is been repurposed into a Jim Crow playground, and then it became a state park.

Unknown Speaker  31:17  
And so when, when I was telling the students about this in the class, they said, What are you going to do about it? And one of the reasons I love to teach in the prison is there is this kind of activist impulse of you have this information. So what's next? And I said, I don't know, maybe I will write an article about it. And they said, We want to do something more. And then we're calling

Unknown Speaker  31:41  
in 2015 or 2016. I saw some of these folks here on the stage, given an amazing conference presentation at the National Conference of higher education and prison.

Unknown Speaker  31:51  
It kind of sparked this idea of how do we turn this into something that is going to change locally how people think about

Unknown Speaker  32:00  
histories of slavery. So currently our students are creating a traveling exhibit, we're going to show this film and we've got a number of we have a number of events planned for the spring where we're going to bring this film and they're traveling exhibit to different museums locally, and we're going to have the public speaking about not only slavery,

Unknown Speaker  32:24  
but also who's incarcerated in their communities.

Unknown Speaker  32:33  
So, one thing I know that that, from my experience with this group of historians, is that historians like talking about their research. So I liked hearing about it because I learned so much.

Unknown Speaker  32:49  
So I'm going to shift the conversation a little bit. My The second question that we had, and this is relevant to Elizabeth

Unknown Speaker  33:00  
At the end as well, you can answer this in your in your own way to like,

Unknown Speaker  33:05  
what is an element of your research that you are most excited about right now?

Unknown Speaker  33:14  
Okay, so I'm gonna try to recap this as concise as possible.

Unknown Speaker  33:19  
Focus. I want to play off of what she said about not having an understanding of why things were the way they work for you. I had the same, same situation, not

Unknown Speaker  33:35  
I was sentenced to three and a half years longer than my co defendant who's male. In my particular case, we committed the same crime at the same time. So I went into the prison assuming that I had gotten sentence longer because I was a couple years older, and maybe they thought that I was brain child brainchild. And, you know, I don't know what I don't know what I thought. No clue.

Unknown Speaker  34:00  
why that happened when I got there. What I heard from so many women was that I was not alone in that the disparity of gender, sentence length is astounding, like for some felony murders when the woman was just the 800 better. And I know right now in five instances in our prison alone, these women got decades longer than their male co defendant who actually committed the crime. So then I'm like, why is this so I get digging in my into my research.

Unknown Speaker  34:34  
Well, well, now I know why it is because even if this isn't a conscious decision on the judges part or prosecutors Park, we are still held to the same standard of progressive era, Victorian moral ladylike behavior. And if we we should have known better is what they think

Unknown Speaker  35:00  
So we give sickness longer what happens and this has been going on since the women's prison since my school, since I'm sure various other institutions and other states

Unknown Speaker  35:14  
they're still very much using eugenic tactics, with incarceration to keep us from procreating. Not only are we getting sentence longer, taking us away from the children that we already have, because obviously, we can't make good decisions. We don't need to be passing those morals on to those children, but they will keep us there. And so we literally cannot have children any longer, whereas the men obviously can procreate. Their their calf was much later in life than ours. This is insane. That's what they used to do. These women, the school was built initially for children and what I love so much about my research in addition to that

Unknown Speaker  36:00  
The Indiana is most known in the 1907 law of sterilization made it mandatory for anyone in any institution in Indiana to be surgically sterilized at the doctors discretion, and that has been written on so much mind. Can I just make a clarifying question? Was that a condition of release?

Unknown Speaker  36:24  
Initially? Initially, not necessarily but shortly after, yes. Okay, so, so what was overlooked was a 1901 law that made it legal to send these women who were morally corrupt, uneducated, and even this was in the law of unmanageable to the school

Unknown Speaker  36:51  
should be held there for their sacrifice for their own protection. Okay, later on the sterilization was offered to them once they started running

Unknown Speaker  37:00  
Went out of room was offered to them as a condition for release. So a lot of historians have focused on the sterilization and completely overlooked these women.

Unknown Speaker  37:10  
And they talked about how great it is to use an invasive surgical procedure on people. And that's why it's got so much play. While I completely agree with that, I argue that leaving someone walked away from their community, from their loved ones, from their freedom of choice, but most importantly, their freedom to find a mate and fall in love, which is a human right is almost worse. If I was given the choice personally, between getting anything on my body removed and being able to leave I would certainly take it I think is important to keep them locked away. So that's I'm very excited to expose what's happened to them

Unknown Speaker  37:56  
and expose that wall in place and now my understanding

Unknown Speaker  38:00  
Why we were treated the way we were.

Unknown Speaker  38:03  
And just to kind of clarify a little bit about your research and how it exists in the context of female incarceration in the stage and historically, what one of the things that you have discovered as well as the women who are researching the girls school, the the house with a shepherd which is an American back to the laundry list, we have one art one researcher who is making that argument in our research Natalie's making that argument, and that they existed in the sentences without in outdate. They were not told At what point they can leave. And the goalposts could be adjusted at any time. So that is also one of the long standing overlooked facets of these less obvious forms of incarceration and institutionalization.

Unknown Speaker  38:56  
Which leads us into what I know I wants to talk about.

Unknown Speaker  39:01  
So on at least tell us what you are excited about to uncover. Okay, so um, I'm going to try my best to use distinctly state to police. The first kind of capstones what motley is talking about. My earlier research really focused on the history of gynecology and obstetrics through the original physician at the Indiana women's prison. Who mind you prior to me and my work, historians have failed to mention, the 10 years he spent working inside that prison with the unabated and unknown complete father of those women's bodies to use as his research material. One of the arguments I'm making is that gynecology and obstetrics was indeed the absolute gateway into the eugenics movement what was happening, we have to understand and let me rephrase this

Unknown Speaker  40:00  
men had to understand how the women's bodies worked. In order to decide which women's bodies were allowed to work in the way they wanted them to work, and which women's bodies we had to completely control and stop from working in reproductive capacity. So until we have these doctors, you know, Dr. Marion Jason's will be considered the father of American gynecology. There's so much talk about him. Of course, we know now he was using the bodies of enslaved African American women for his research. What people did not realize is that good old doctor, the awfulest Barban, just went on ahead and picked up that bag and started using it with women in prison. And then other people started using it with other institutionalize women like the school for the feeble minded, and you know, so many of these other institutions and central state institution, all of the different insane hospitals for people throughout Indiana

Unknown Speaker  41:00  
But what I've come to realize is how the body itself, and medicine in particular has now been used as spaces for power and control of one human being over enough. Because prior to the 19th century, these male physicians coming in and just wreaking havoc on women's bodies in order to gain knowledge for their purposes of power and control, mostly anything ob gyn related was handled by other women.

Unknown Speaker  41:35  
Now, I find it appalling how we have built yet one more institution that is controlling people's bodies at the most intimate level, how women in today's society, we are convinced that we must go see a gynecologist even if there's nothing wrong with us, and how false This is how we have lost ownership and the right to trade on

Unknown Speaker  42:00  
bodies are to work with one another in community to find holistic ways of healing. We have made the female body and disease entity in and onto itself. And so, you know, it's about using the research to explain to people how their own bodies can and will and are used against them for somebody else's agenda power and control. On the other side of that equation, is I am a big advocate now talking about systemic injustice, who do we consider as the knower versus the noble objects, and I argue that one of the largest ways we have done this is through negative labeling. So whether we are labeling people as criminal or feeble minded, or mentally ill, or any of these other terms now, that will automatically bring people and negative stereotypical association of somebody I'm challenging that

Unknown Speaker  43:00  
This work becomes a space in a place to contest these labels, and look beyond what the label itself is doing and realizing that the labels are the very thing that gives people the power to determine which bodies are expendable, right bubble disposable, and can be used as human commodity for somebody else's property. As long as we are doing these things, we will go from group to group to group to group that we say it is absolutely acceptable to use these people over here to gain knowledge and profit off of their bodies, their minds, their ideas, their whatever. And so that's what I'm doing.

Unknown Speaker  43:47  
So I'm

Unknown Speaker  43:49  
actually think that this is a really good way that we can close with a topic that relates to that idea of control of labeling, because I didn't

Unknown Speaker  44:00  
All of us sitting in this room can agree that the carceral system itself is an ongoing and in perpetuity because our

Unknown Speaker  44:09  
system of labeling people based on their history, their behavior, how society interprets their history, and their behavior, and how we respond to it. And so thinking about those ideas of power, and of knowledge and labeling, and I'm looking at my other notes, because I know there were a couple of other things I wanted to let this group talk about.

Unknown Speaker  44:34  
So

Unknown Speaker  44:36  
that idea that we have to fight against that culture, both historically and in the president, and that it is an ongoing act of activism and advocacy. And I had something for you, but I can't remember what it was now because I didn't write it down. So we'll let y'all talk. Okay, so a few of our the men in our program had

Unknown Speaker  45:00  
Some statements I would like to just kind of very quickly go back to the previous question which is the kind of research that they're interested in and kind of what they're excited about. One student Mercury, wrote the following. We have worked diligently to understand the history of the spring garden plantation and share with the public after transcribing the last will and testament of by Anthony Stark, a formerly enslaved individual who label who labored at the spring garden plantation. We found that Anthony had owned 40 acres of property. He bequeath this property to his wife Sarah has brothers Joe, Cindy and Frank Brown and his sister Amelia over. In addition, I read transcriptions held at the enterprise Heritage Museum of an interview that Mr. Clean, Mr. Leon Clemens participated in in 2000. This allowed me to make a connection between Amelia Roper and Mr. Clements. So essentially what Mercury is saying here is that through his archival research, he was able to find living history

Unknown Speaker  46:00  
And of independent individuals who were enslaved at that time, they put together a packet of information and gave it to Mr. Clements found out that his that Amelia instead other family members are buried in abandoned cemetery that was the first free black community in Volusia County. And so now students are talking about how do we save that cemetery, some different kinds of activism that are emerging out of this project that we couldn't have anticipated. And so that was one of the things that mercury was most excited about. And I wanted to share and then quickly can wrote about the history of black feminists. So black samples were free people are formerly enslaved individuals who escaped bondage from places like Georgia and Mississippi and then migrated down into northern Florida, Central Florida and became

Unknown Speaker  46:59  
here

Unknown Speaker  47:00  
rights throughout the history of the Florida territory, regardless if it was held by Spain, England or America black people that participated in all the armed conflicts that occurred in the region, particularly at the commencement of the second seminal war, roughly 1500 blacks both free and runaway live among the Seminoles. The impacts of the war from black Seminoles like john Caesar, George W. Ito, and Ben have mostly been forgotten. The majority of the first hand accounts of the battles show that these people perform valiantly in the face of the enemy. Unfortunately, many historians have marginalize their contribution. This negligence of recognizing the important resistance of these leaders has been greatest in the regard to those who are considered the slaves assembles. However, these warriors played integral roles in the success of famous operation, such as the Battle of with la coochie, the Battle of wahoo swamp and most demonstrably the excitement of slaves of the East Florida plantation and the ensuing revolt.

Unknown Speaker  48:00  
For example, john Cesar led a band of Seminoles and runaways that incited insurrections in Bushwick County, which led to the destruction of at least 28 plantations and the liberation of more than 500 slaves. Evidence of prior communication between slaves and assembles, in addition to the personal accounts relating recently deliberate slaves and war paint indicates that this effort was coordinated beforehand. 10 goes on to talk about his research in which he connected the registry of the slave manifest to the registry of prisoners and congressional records, revealing that one of the people that were enslaved at the spring garden plantation likely was removed and actually earn their freedom after the second seminal war and was brought out into Arkansas territory, and so it's not only about covering the names of individuals were enslaved, but beginning to tell the stories more fully and these improbable stories of black freedom

Unknown Speaker  49:01  
Alrighty, well at this time, I would love to open the floor for audience questions. I will say, once we are done with audience questions, we do have a statement that we will read from our the women who are currently incarcerated in Indiana women's prison. So we want to close with that. But I believe we have time for several questions, if anybody wants to come up.

Unknown Speaker  49:30  
Any questions?

Unknown Speaker  49:40  
Thank you for your amazing work. And I'm sorry, I have to follow them came a little late. So if you already discussed this, just tell me But how did you get access to resources and research materials? What kind of technology was it was not available to you? How did you get archival materials? Can you talk about some of the limitations that you're working with? Short

Unknown Speaker  50:00  
So, originally Dr. Kelsey Kaufman, who showed in the video who was the founder of the project on the outside, she had a decent rapport with the superintendent of our institution and said, Hey, I want to come in on really, I think she was trying to do a social experiment, India and I had lost the private Pell granting for college programming just prior to this happening. And so there was this decimation of higher education in prison at the top. And Dr. Papa was arguing that she believed people would offer education for the sake of educational love. And so she wanted to come in. She wanted to build a higher education program inside the prison to prove this point, that the state was no longer going to provide funding in any way. idfc certainly wasn't doing anything to try to implement higher education and they're like, sure, we're not going to give you any money.

Unknown Speaker  51:00  
And we're not going to give you any resources or materials. But if you can figure out how to come in and build this school in here have that. And some of the processes that one of the things she decided she wanted to do is, hey, let's teach undergraduate students how to do research by using the early archives in the prison itself. And because she had this report with the warden, he said, certainly, I'll give you the first 1015 years worth of records, no problem, have that and have fun. And you know, this was kind of how Michelle and myself and some of the other already graduate students became integrated into this, we were going to help assist is to these to these, doing this research on records of our own institutions. So that's kind of how it started. And then when we started on our thing, things and we started seeing a much larger picture at play. This is when it kind of started getting interesting because now it was how are we going to get into

Unknown Speaker  52:00  
information, we really did not have internet access on the inside, we were limited with what we could have. One of the beauties of what Dr. Kaufman and some of the other professors that work with us did was they brought us a tremendous amount of secondary source in game about Indiana 19th century about the feminist 19th century about doctors and medical 19th century. So it started giving us this good conceptual understanding of what was going on in the state and in the community we were talking about, and from the multifaceted areas and we were looking at things through these documents. And from there, we were able to formulate deeper questions and deeper theories and analysis and go back to people on the outside and that was inherently, this took an entire team of human beings to make this happen. It was not just those of us inside, and it was not the few individuals that were

Unknown Speaker  53:00  
coming inside, we had to enlist the help of state archivist. And librarians and people from multifaceted sectors that became excited about the Word became engaged and said, How can I help? And sometimes that was material resource. Sometimes it was financial resource because again, the state was giving the money. These professors were just giving their tongue. And let me talk about how much extra time it took. We could not go to the archive ourself and do the research that met somebody on the outside had to take our questions and our theories which mind you sometimes they didn't even agree with our theories and have to go try to find like a needle in a haystack what the hell it was we were looking for. So it was a huge collaborative effort. But one well worth taking.

Unknown Speaker  54:01  
So just kind of following up with what Ana was saying. Our project, it's, it's a collective, it takes many, many people. And so not only those folks that you saw on the film, but we've had, we had a number of men in our program, we started this research project and they were transferred. Or they are lighting stuff up right now who's currently in confinement, and you see the saw the film and so it's,

Unknown Speaker  54:29  
it takes a lot of work on the one hand, and more than just kind of the students that you saw here.

Unknown Speaker  54:36  
And then on the outside, our history project is part of a larger higher education and prison program. And so work from co directors from Compton, storoe, and Petra make folks who are doing all the work around this program that allow it to operate. And then very similar. At first before we had a computer lab, we were doing everything by hand.

Unknown Speaker  55:00  
by we, I mean, the researcher, so we would print out things and they would do transcriptions by hand, Antonio translated about a 70 page document of a Spanish land grant in Spanish and then translated parts of it that would be useful to the other folks who have broken down into smaller teams. And so it really is a collective. It takes a lot of work and resources and parking goes much beyond what you see here.

Unknown Speaker  55:30  
This is a big deal to me.

Unknown Speaker  55:32  
So, pencil and paper, and that's it. Like I have stacks and stacks of loose pages of information that they brought in some of the type

Unknown Speaker  55:43  
of things that I would have to Herbert nights or something that people don't usually think about is the company the prison is definitely like all day long. It's just

Unknown Speaker  55:56  
it's difficult to concentrate as a cyclist

Unknown Speaker  56:00  
So I'm up all night with this very damn nightlight, going through all this stuff on all this stuff circling, highlighting

Unknown Speaker  56:13  
and then trying to write in the door What I wanted to say. So you decide everything. You know, if anyone's ever written anything, you want to rearrange things, then you gotta embrace your reference numbers and redo everything. I would I didn't have a degree right now, although I've made one college for some years since been broken up for various reasons. But so I at first didn't think that I could consider myself a story. But after doing my research and my work, circuit at no one style, I feel like I can call myself with a story in if I want to, and I'm right up there with anybody else.

Unknown Speaker  56:56  
It's a big deal.

Unknown Speaker  56:59  
Yeah,

Unknown Speaker  57:00  
You are historian Absolutely.

Unknown Speaker  57:02  
The just to name a just name a few other specific documents, like for the research that has been done on the house of the Good Shepherd, which is a Catholic run, female and carceral institution and those are located in Indianapolis and 18th 19th century. There are Catholic archival documents that we use animals written by the nuns themselves who ran the grant institution, also extrapolating data from things like business advertisements from state and local property records from letters that were written by people by you know, census registries, and then this literally everything that we that this team thought of that could potentially these information was the scan because almost all it was, you know, on paper trying to make it legible.

Unknown Speaker  58:00  
Yes, and, you know, man, tiny, tiny,

Unknown Speaker  58:04  
and then keeping it all organized. You know, it's a logistical

Unknown Speaker  58:11  
nightmare. But yeah, it's it's it takes a lot. It takes a lot

Unknown Speaker  58:16  
that's worth.

Unknown Speaker  58:19  
Hi there, I want to applaud you all for being exterminated with historians. But I wanted to ask how much access to education you had prior to your entry in prison? Because there's something about your story that just seems so exceptional. And I'm wondering, on one hand, how much education for the people behind bars as you've observed, and then did you feel as though you had opportunities that were this rich, prior to having experiences?

Unknown Speaker  58:50  
I, I went to a very small, high school, graduate across

Unknown Speaker  58:57  
the country. Not Not a lot

Unknown Speaker  59:00  
Were there. It wasn't a bad school, but it was nothing exceptional about it. I signed up for at least in 2006. I did about two years.

Unknown Speaker  59:11  
pretty well, but I work full time as a single mom, it was struggling to juggle everything.

Unknown Speaker  59:19  
problem I dropped out, and I got arrested. So I spent five and a half years in there three women's prisons and I had to stay at two county jails and all three women's prisons. And it was the only one that offered any kind of college courses. I jumped at the chance, the two semesters there before they pulled out because of funding.

Unknown Speaker  59:45  
And since my release,

Unknown Speaker  59:50  
Nelson has helped me get admitted into Ivy lie. And so we're going to make that the greatest time. But that's my education.

Unknown Speaker  1:00:01  
I went to college five times prior to incarceration, I earned a degree in nothing. Why? Because a piece of paper doesn't mean shit to me that's just keeping it 100 being as blunt as I can be.

Unknown Speaker  1:00:16  
I am a voracious seeker of knowledge in all forms so I'm the kind of individual that if something sparks my interest, I will go after it. Like the Scooby Doo gang I get to the bottom of that shit I want to know everything I can know about it. So yeah, so I guess I wasn't a historian by default the entire time. Anyway, so I mean, I went to school five different times prior

Unknown Speaker  1:00:42  
you know, you get locked up college was offered at the time fucking, why not get the degree there's nothing better to do really. So I went on ahead and decided to re enroll in college, this time honing and focusing on area of studying a little bit more and getting a little deeper into that.

Unknown Speaker  1:01:00  
Because I wanted to find real tangible answers. I mean, for me, the education was not about the degree, it was not so much about that. It was how do we make sense of all this bullshit? And what am I going to do to fix it? You know, so

Unknown Speaker  1:01:15  
exceptionalism is really a hairy thing. You know, I think it's really easy to find people who are doing amazing things and try to act like we are some sort of an anomaly and that really is just not the case. I mean, it's lack of access of opportunity. Give people fucking opportunity, and they will rise to the occasion. I don't give a damn who they are or where they are or what the circumstances. So, you know, it's this ridiculous notion that some people are inherently intelligent, and then other people are inherently ignorant and it's bullshit. And so I there's one more thing I want to address about your question, how are we able to do this? This is one time that I can say that God has

Unknown Speaker  1:02:00  
The fake stereotype. Nobody thought that we were capable of doing what we were going to do when they handed us these documents or the way they thought like, yes, we're going to pat them on the back for the good fucking job you people did in the 19th century, building a prison to house women and wasn't that I do. I mean, nobody thought that we were going to be smart enough to figure out that there was more to the story in that first and second, this is probably the bigger one. Nobody expected the world to take us serious. When we were allowed to get on Skype inside the prison and go to conferences. We were supposed to be divorced thing and come show. We were supposed to be more of the look how amazing our prisoners are, and aren't they shining examples of rehabilitation? The prison could then take all the credit for our knowledge like that never would have existed without them. It's bullshit.

Unknown Speaker  1:03:00  
Okay, so people have inherent intelligence and that intelligence can be fostered and can be blossom when you give them the opportunity to use

Unknown Speaker  1:03:19  
about our students and kind of what they're doing kind of a diversity off the line with some folks who were in college when they were incarcerated, other folks who are, many of them are while incarcerated.

Unknown Speaker  1:03:32  
And if I could just really quickly kind of speaks to one of the things that one of our students had written that we didn't get to.

Unknown Speaker  1:03:40  
The other part of this panel is from Cassidy appeared in the film and what he is saying is about the importance of higher education in prison, but more specifically, how to address when he refers to his prison culture which fosters a state of oppression when sentencing policy

Unknown Speaker  1:04:00  
focused primarily on punishment. And then he goes on to talk about the different ways in which the prison discourages people from trying to access any sort of education. And I would also say right now Stetson University is the only college or university offering college credits from a four year institution in the entire state. There's 96,000 people currently incarcerated in Florida. 22 of them have access to college credits from a four year institution, which is a pourraient. He writes very few higher education program opportunities exist, especially for those longer sentences. So about half of our students have life sentences, and they gravitate to our program, particularly because there's nothing else for them, right. Oftentimes, they aren't even afforded access to GED classes. If we're not going to get out, then why should we provide them with anything? I believe that

Unknown Speaker  1:05:00  
is thinking about this. He says there's no time incentives for program participation. incarcerated people have to serve a minimum of an 85% of their of their sentence and he says that there's no parole, which was abolished in 1983.

Unknown Speaker  1:05:18  
And so, Cassidy is currently working on an initiative called 19 dash four titled the offender Reentry Program, which is meant to create a mechanism for review and supervised release for incarcerated individuals. And then secondly, to foster a prison culture that is conducive to higher education by demanding

Unknown Speaker  1:05:42  
by creating a demand for opportunities and then he would encourage you all to visit the website, on Facebook Floridians for redeemable people if you want to learn more about that.

Unknown Speaker  1:05:56  
Thank you, everyone, for being here. I'm really sorry that we didn't get to address your question.

Unknown Speaker  1:06:01  
will be here after.

Unknown Speaker  1:06:03  
But before we before we depart to dinner, I just want to read a statement that I worked with our current university researchers to draft just to acknowledge their presence and also acknowledge their

Unknown Speaker  1:06:21  
their feelings about being involved in the history project.

Unknown Speaker  1:06:25  
The Indiana women's prison History Project has provided us with many opportunities to facilitate change within ourselves and to promote change in public knowledge of carceral states and personal histories. For some of us, we had become the voices for women who were never allowed to speak for themselves, whose identities and stories were lost in overloads. The connection with these women and the institutions that segregated them has, has offered new contexts for processing our own incarceration. Through our dedication and our efforts, we would come to new understanding of survivorship.

Unknown Speaker  1:07:00  
Victims stories and the immediate relevance of emotional experience. The trust that has been placed in us to uncover the truths of these institutions, and to then articulate those truths to the larger world has been incredibly meaningful and empowering. We have been trusted as colleagues. And as pioneers of this field of research. This project has made us feel real.

Unknown Speaker  1:07:23  
It has made us feel real.

Unknown Speaker  1:07:26  
It has engaged our passions has honed our focus and has generated positivity, new direction, greater well being and a strong sense of worth, we can carry this outside with us. For most of us, this is not something we ever thought we could do. in being part of this project. We have become so much more than we thought we could be. Thank you very much for being with us today. Thank you.

Unknown Speaker  1:08:00  
So, so really briefly, I just like to kind of give you a sense of what to expect going forward. So we're going to take a short break. And then I think what we'll do is starting on 445. We're going to be honoring our own higher education and prison program. The prison the college pipeline here with Dr. Is picot, Dr. Patrick Alexander, and the Dean of the College of Liberal Arts, the comment. So if you could just take a break, relax and then around 445 right before the keynote will do that and moving to our final keynote. Thank you.

Unknown Speaker  1:14:36  
Hey

Unknown Speaker  1:16:02  
Yeah, I think so correctly.

Unknown Speaker  1:16:45  
Bye bye

Unknown Speaker  1:27:31  
Change

Unknown Speaker  1:34:40  
American Security

Unknown Speaker  1:37:07  
So if we can kind of filter in take you sees

Unknown Speaker  1:37:12  
a gentle Two Minute Warning

Unknown Speaker  1:37:39  
yeah

Unknown Speaker  1:38:42  
Yeah,

Unknown Speaker  1:38:57  
they might they might be here with

Unknown Speaker  1:39:41  
We've

Unknown Speaker  1:39:42  
created

Unknown Speaker  1:39:46  
a Kickstarter, like for families

Unknown Speaker  1:39:54  
around

Unknown Speaker  1:39:58  
All right, I'm going to begin

Unknown Speaker  1:40:00  
Gentle two minute reminders are ready just like this doesn't count for anything. No beginning counts for something. So

Unknown Speaker  1:40:10  
as our previous panel demonstrated programs such as the ibp history project and the Community Education Project are crucial to the digital transformation necessary to both end mass incarceration and to democratize higher education.

Unknown Speaker  1:40:25  
In fact, almost every speaker here at this conference has spoken in some way who's been formally incarcerated can testify to the significance of education in prisons. Michelle Molly and now Estancia are all alumni of the identity History Project. During Matt graduated through the barn prison initiative, Cathy Dean was central to getting college back at Bedford Hills. We heard Steve Wilson speak earlier about the importance of abolitionists study groups. And on our very first evening in our Woodfox his memoir, he writes about surviving for decades of solitary confinement and by turning this

Unknown Speaker  1:41:00  
into a university.

Unknown Speaker  1:41:03  
If we're serious about prison abolition, and we're serious about educational equity, we need to find and develop meaningful educational opportunities to people while they're incarcerated, and securing expanded access after their time of service.

Unknown Speaker  1:41:18  
So now it is my absolute privilege to join Dean the coaching and honorary honorary, the university's very own prison and college pipeline, and it's two co founders and directors, Dr. Patrick Alexander and Otis Pickett.

Unknown Speaker  1:41:32  
They described the program which was established in 2014 as a core ethical education based response to the culture of educational deprivation that exists behind bars. Indeed, there is no greater predictor of incarceration than education level and once incarcerated, once incarcerated, especially since the 94 crime bill ended programs inside. There are often few opportunities for incarcerated people to pursue and a meaningful

Unknown Speaker  1:42:00  
Intellectual endeavors, more or less a post secondary education.

Unknown Speaker  1:42:06  
The prison the college pipeline is a student centered program which responds to the intellectual curiosity and interest of men at Mississippi State Penitentiary, and beginning in 2016 of women at Central Mississippi prison. The courses are rigorous for credit and often co taught and interdisciplinary

Unknown Speaker  1:42:26  
because Dr. Pickett is a professor of history at Mississippi college and Dr. Alexander of English here at the University of Mississippi, the PTC VP has become not just an interdisciplinary but also an inter institutional educational Alliance across the state.

Unknown Speaker  1:42:42  
I would also like to recognize another major partner and collaborator, the Mississippi humanities councils, Stuart rockoff, and Carol Anderson, who have been chief supporters of the program as well as other efforts to expand higher education in prisons across Mississippi.

Unknown Speaker  1:42:57  
And as embodied in the name of the program.

Unknown Speaker  1:43:00  
Its ambition is not merely to offer responsive education to incarcerated students, but to extend those opportunities well beyond.

Unknown Speaker  1:43:09  
Otis and Patrick and their recent article in the Journal of African American History urge others to join in this coalition to co create more pathways for all formerly incarcerated students in the state to earn bachelor's degrees and advanced to the higher highest level of postgraduate educational achievement that they desire.

Unknown Speaker  1:43:27  
Despite being a relative newcomer to the university, I've had the pleasure of attending class orientation and inventory as well as a graduation ceremony at parchman with Dr. Alexander. And I can say that his attention to students and their learning from beginning of course, to its end reflects the recent award given to the prison the college pipeline by the Mississippi Humanities Council. So I'm going to turn it over to another longtime supporter of the program, the Dean of the College of Liberal Arts leakycon Thanks

Unknown Speaker  1:44:08  
Good afternoon, everybody. It is my great pleasure to join Dr. Phil. We're here this afternoon to formally recognize and honor the work of Dr. Patrick Alexander. You are an associate professor of English and African American Studies here at the University of Mississippi. And Dr. Otis Pickett, who's an assistant professor of history at Mississippi power and she also is a graduate of our history programs we still like to claim that you can.

Unknown Speaker  1:44:39  
Since its founding in 2014, the program has provided transformational education to individuals at parchman Central Mississippi Correctional Facility. Dr. Alexander and Dr. Pickett are innovators and pioneers in the scholarship on mass incarceration and pedagogy in prisons. This is evidence by Dr. Brown

Unknown Speaker  1:45:00  
Alexander's recent book from slave ship to Supermax, mass incarceration, prisoner abuse and the media Neo slave novel, along with several single and co authored articles on teaching in parchment, and as well as numerous conference presentations that were authored by Dr. Alexander and Dr. Pickett.

Unknown Speaker  1:45:20  
These scholars have most certainly paved the way for prison education and justice initiatives at the University of Mississippi and throughout the state of Mississippi. This impactful work was recently recognized as governor said, by the Mississippi manatees council think with the 2018 humanities educator.

Unknown Speaker  1:45:40  
Now Dr. Alexander and Dr. Pickett came together through a shared interest in prison education. Dr. Alexander had developed a program called stepping stones at Orange Correctional Center in Hillsboro, North Carolina while still a PhD student at Duke University, and Dr. picot began became interested in Thursday education

Unknown Speaker  1:46:00  
After attending Duke divinity schools Summer Institute on racial reconciliation.

Unknown Speaker  1:46:06  
The prison that college pipeline program is grounded in the tradition of centering experiences. rjL of the marginalized learner and dedicated to the bell hooks engage pedagogy requires moment on mobility and risk taking in the classroom by both teacher and student.

Unknown Speaker  1:46:24  
They shared with me that they started this program because they both love the learning and learners believe that the meaningful, meaningful learning happens everywhere in the prison walls. Moreover, they're serious about making a bold, education based, ethically responsible response to the incarceration epidemic in Mississippi. They were inspired by the profound role of the student centered prison education has played not only in reducing recidivism, but also positively transforming is the isolated prison environments and the post imprisonment outlooks.

Unknown Speaker  1:47:00  
Your prison students. And they also wanted to bring that transformational education culture to prisons in the state of Mississippi in a way that spoke to the specific educational goals and electrical curiosities of college level and college aspiring students who happen to need prison.

Unknown Speaker  1:47:20  
They work together with many of their colleagues to offer an impressive list of courses and I won't go through all of them, but just to name a few justice everywhere the civil rights stories of Martin Luther King Jr. Manning, haber, brock obama, education and the environment from black fiction to creative nonfiction, Mississippi, then and now Turning Oppression into Opportunity, understanding justice, human rights and gender through the lens of Southern women's experiences from the indigenous era to the modern civil rights era.

Unknown Speaker  1:47:55  
I've had the honor of company Dr. Alexander to gratulations at parchman and

Unknown Speaker  1:48:00  
Truly moved by the work they're doing, seeing their passion and the impact they have on their students firsthand. I have no doubt I know some of you have had the opportunity to talk to them a little bit here today. But I have no doubt that if you talk to either of them for just a couple of minutes, the philosophy behind their work is oftentimes, they see social change in social justice through education as a collective and collaborative endeavor. They're also both very, very good at deflecting attention away from their own hard work, and dedication and spend most of their time thanking and recognizing all of the other individuals and organizations who helped build the prison of college pipeline program, or praising the work of their talented students. They understand from that it's clear that they understand that none of this work happens alone, and they selflessly lift up the efforts of others. So to be treated the way they work, and I know this is what they would want me to do. I want to recognize the many supporters

Unknown Speaker  1:49:00  
was long supported the prison the college pipeline program, and health insurance existence and sustainability. I've heard them say on many occasions that their ability to reach increasing students and teach for credit forces and raise awareness about their college and prison program at parchman. Central Mississippi correctional facility is because of the ongoing support counsel and encouragement of the following departments and centers and I apologize that it's a little bit lengthy, but I know they wouldn't want me to leave anybody out. So at the University of Mississippi, the College of Liberal Arts, the Department of English, the African American Studies Program, the arch our third Department of History, the division of outreach, their fellow court, co organizers of the rethinking mass incarceration in the south, the conferences that were held on campus in 2014, and 2016.

Unknown Speaker  1:49:55  
Also the Sarah Isom Center for the Study of women and gender, the center

Unknown Speaker  1:50:00  
Studying Southern culture, the William winter Institute for racial reconciliation, and the McLean Institute for Public Service and community engagement.

Unknown Speaker  1:50:10  
at Mississippi college, the School of Humanities and Social Sciences, the Department of History in political science, the Department of English, the Department of Communication, and the Department of Psychology and counseling. Beyond the institutions where were both of these individuals were the Mississippi Humanities Council, and the team teaching supportive professors from the University of Mississippi, Mississippi college, but also millsaps College, Jackson State University, Mississippi Valley State University and compile Lincoln Community College. So So tonight I'm honored to be here on behalf of the College of Liberal Arts and the organizers of the movie conference, especially Dr. developer, I want to be sure that we lift up the foundational and inspirational work with Dr. Patrick Alexander and Dr. Otis pigging

Unknown Speaker  1:51:00  
I wanted to do this publicly. I wanted to thank them publicly for all the work that they do instead of deflecting it to everybody else. And, and know that this work that they're doing is central to the mission of the University of Mississippi, which is to transform lives, communities and the world by providing opportunities for the people in Mississippi and beyond. This work is without a doubt, inclusive teaching. And I just want to thank you, Patrick, and thank you Otis, if you please all just join me in a round of applause for

Unknown Speaker  1:52:12  
Well, thank you.

Unknown Speaker  1:52:15  
Thank you Dean Coleman.

Unknown Speaker  1:52:17  
Thank you Dr. Jared Felber, and thank you movie conference. Because power able to do, what we've done is because of the support that you've seen,

Unknown Speaker  1:52:29  
I can say as a associate professor here, that from my very first day of working here at faculty orientation, the College of Liberal Arts, was committed to prison education where it was actually stated on three occasions at faculty orientation, if you want money, as a faculty member to teach in prison to educate learners in our state, who are incarcerated.

Unknown Speaker  1:53:00  
We have money here at this university for that. And it was the outgoing Dean, Dean Glenn Hopkins, who said that, and six years later, look at with prison college pipeline program is. So I want us to thank and your warm round of applause to the colon and the College of Liberal Arts for making this dream a reality.

Unknown Speaker  1:53:31  
We also have a couple of our

Unknown Speaker  1:53:34  
teaching assistants if they will stand in the bag, Allison series and July, we

Unknown Speaker  1:53:47  
will be outstanding and help us as we do teach classes in English in history. It's just it's just a profound honor. So I also can't help but be thanks

Unknown Speaker  1:54:00  
to our students. It's really their hunger as we go in each semester and ask, what would you like us to teach? And, you know, how can we improve that helps us program grow. So I know they're not here. But I want to tell them when I see the next just how much they appreciate it as well. So if you would give a round of applause for all of our incarcerated students who are talking to

Unknown Speaker  1:54:36  
Greetings, I'll be very brief and just say thank you so much. Thank you for coming to Mississippi to help continue this conversation and the state. Thank you so much, Dr. felger, and the organizers of this conference. I do want to thank the Department of History for teaching the about incarceration in America and enslavement in America and coming

Unknown Speaker  1:55:00  
Here's a graduate student in that department opened my eyes. And I would not be doing this work if it were not for the study of history. So I just want to really thank each and every history professor and every person who invested in me when I was here. And finally, I just want to thank my brother, Dr. Patrick Alexander, who is one of my best friends in the world and who has taught me more than I'll ever know, and continue to teach me as I continue to go. And I'm just bringing greetings from our students in central Mississippi Correctional Facility. They're very thankful that you're here and having this conversation. So thank you so much.

Unknown Speaker  1:56:01  
All right,

Unknown Speaker  1:56:03  
still standing like as you're sitting, but you're here.

Unknown Speaker  1:56:10  
I don't know what to say. I mean, this is the end.

Unknown Speaker  1:56:15  
I mentioned it to Elizabeth Nelson was just talking to her about how last night I was like, I can't believe we have a whole nother day. I feel totally full and depleted at the same time. And now that we're at the end, I'm like, No, one more day.

Unknown Speaker  1:56:31  
So I just want to thank everyone who's here. It means the world to me and to a lot of folks to be in these spaces and having these conversations and disagree in productive way. And just thinking through these issues that consume a lot of our isolated time, but we don't always get a chance to be in community

Unknown Speaker  1:56:52  
with

Unknown Speaker  1:56:55  
if not like minded folks, I'm what Ruthie said.

Unknown Speaker  1:57:00  
Earlier I thought was so important about, we don't all agree, we don't all have to. So it's not about necessarily necessarily being like minded but I think that community, you know, just radical love, which I felt over the last couple days. I just want to thank you all for that. That means a lot.

Unknown Speaker  1:57:22  
So, Casey lambing can't be with us tonight and he sends his regards of that.

Unknown Speaker  1:57:31  
gc lamb. I know.

Unknown Speaker  1:57:34  
I feel that way too. I feel that way to me. So you know that I know.

Unknown Speaker  1:57:40  
But we are we are truly blessed to have joining us for our final keynote conversation, Niecy Coleman and Ricky Lumumba, so if you could please give them a huge warm welcome to the stage. Thank you.

Unknown Speaker  1:58:41  
Good I know it's been a long day. I'm going to hold the mic for a second. It's easier for me. So you know we have to change this to the to the schedules tonight and so x My dear comrades and friends

Unknown Speaker  1:59:00  
And mentor to come up and be with me a conversation around the work that we're doing here in Jackson. But before I go any further here, Mississippi period, but I will focus a lot of my conversation on Jackson. My name is Ricky.

Unknown Speaker  1:59:18  
I am from Mississippi.

Unknown Speaker  1:59:22  
raised here not born here, but it is a deep place that I love and appreciate and I'm glad to be a part of um, so before I go further, I want to say freelance.

Unknown Speaker  1:59:34  
Freelance, freelance, we say by any means necessary. So freedom land is a battle cry that comes from a group of people who back in 1971 in Mississippi, journey to Mississippi from all over summer from Mississippi, so purchase a body of land between Edwards and Bolton.

Unknown Speaker  2:00:00  
Mississippi and they purchase this land and in 19 1971, to literally began a new community, a community where they as black people could feel safe, where they as black people could actually create a form of governance of their community that they felt made sure that everybody was treated with respect with dignity. With that there was ample opportunity for people's needs to be met, and that they weren't existing in a state of fear and threatened their personal body constantly as they have been, because just a couple of weeks before they had actually bought this land. Couple of weeks before two students students at Jackson State University have been gunned down

Unknown Speaker  2:00:45  
and killed by police

Unknown Speaker  2:00:49  
from protesting

Unknown Speaker  2:00:52  
at their own door.

Unknown Speaker  2:00:54  
And there is so many cars that happened throughout the nation for so long against Black Friday.

Unknown Speaker  2:01:00  
They wanted to just create a safe space. So on this day in 1971, they organized to go and celebrate the land that they had purchased.

Unknown Speaker  2:01:11  
And so it was men, women and children about 500. Again.

Unknown Speaker  2:01:16  
They throw them in a caravan down the Toledo boys and bolts in Mississippi and when they got too close to their land,

Unknown Speaker  2:01:25  
there was a barricade

Unknown Speaker  2:01:28  
and that barricade included the police.

Unknown Speaker  2:01:33  
The Jackson police department is wanting to

Unknown Speaker  2:01:36  
include a special group Bruce included the FBI,

Unknown Speaker  2:01:41  
included some CIA CIA members.

Unknown Speaker  2:01:46  
And they were blocking their entrance to the land.

Unknown Speaker  2:01:52  
And so some members who are responsible for security got out of the car

Unknown Speaker  2:01:57  
and they went and they approached

Unknown Speaker  2:02:00  
The folks that were blacking the land.

Unknown Speaker  2:02:04  
One of those folks is my father Shockwave delay Shockwave.

Unknown Speaker  2:02:10  
And I see approach the land of the police officer in charge.

Unknown Speaker  2:02:16  
He said I promise you the fear.

Unknown Speaker  2:02:19  
I was terrified. But I looked back at all of the people that had come with me. And I said, I have to push. I have some. So he approached me said soon as he got into the office and obviously said, no land celebration day happening today. I know last celebration happening today you some more profanity, right? As

Unknown Speaker  2:02:44  
my father

Unknown Speaker  2:02:46  
then looked at him and said, Well, we ate in the moment of turning around.

Unknown Speaker  2:02:54  
And he looks back at all of the people that come with them.

Unknown Speaker  2:02:59  
And he said,

Unknown Speaker  2:03:00  
We began to pray.

Unknown Speaker  2:03:02  
It says strong revolutionaries draw back to prayer.

Unknown Speaker  2:03:06  
So we began to pray. He looked back at the officer, he said, it was like the Red Sea had just opened.

Unknown Speaker  2:03:14  
They just began to open up the barricade the gates, and allow people to go on.

Unknown Speaker  2:03:22  
People were so excited to actually push through that barricade and walk onto the land that they had rightfully and legally purchase. That when they got there, they began to eat the dirt of the land,

Unknown Speaker  2:03:35  
literally began to put the Dart in the mouth. And that's where we get to say they were overjoyed with the fact that they could actually just touch them. And

Unknown Speaker  2:03:45  
that's where we get the same freedom.

Unknown Speaker  2:03:48  
Because we recognize that land is just as pressure it's not about owning it.

Unknown Speaker  2:03:54  
It's about using it responsibly, to create better opportunities for everyone involved.

Unknown Speaker  2:04:00  
So that was so overjoyed by that, that they could have a space that they could actually control that they began to eat the land and we say freelance, freelance, freelance.

Unknown Speaker  2:04:13  
So that is why we say that's all the master we start with, because it reminds us of the struggles of all of those that came before us.

Unknown Speaker  2:04:22  
And so I'm very honored to be here today. I'm very honored that you all are here. For those of you who are visiting Mississippi for the first time or the second time or the third time. I'm disappointed that I can't be up here with my brother KSA system Academy, but I'm super excited to be up here with Denise Kaufman, who is an amazing human being that has been organizing inside and outside of federal and state prison facilities for 3830 plus years. And so we're going to be a conversation today about what what we do

Unknown Speaker  2:05:00  
We're in Mississippi, because the goal is to hope, hopefully, ground you a little bit about Mississippi and what we're doing. And then second to really give you an opportunity to understand this journey that we're taking, and where we hope to go. And then third, is to really talk about this idea of community led governments. What does it look like in real form? Right? What does it look like? For regardless of if you have the right to vote or not, because you're formerly incarcerated for because you have a not a nationalized citizen? What does it mean to still have a right to decide the policies and practices that actually impacts us on a day to day basis in your city in your neighborhood. So I'm going to talk a little bit more about that. And so I'm going to go ahead and add these. So tell us a little bit about myself.

Unknown Speaker  2:06:01  
why you're here in Mississippi.

Unknown Speaker  2:06:13  
Everybody knows calls PDC copelan. But everybody calls me

Unknown Speaker  2:06:20  
I'm here. I live here in Mississippi. I'm not from here.

Unknown Speaker  2:06:26  
I have lost my hair.

Unknown Speaker  2:06:28  
And my home is teasing me about it but I try. You know, because I have to do other things. Nobody understands. waiting. Would you do how you do that there?

Unknown Speaker  2:06:44  
So we have our normal language but it's okay. I'm here Mississippi, I live here and

Unknown Speaker  2:06:51  
I was incarcerated and the federal income temporary

Unknown Speaker  2:06:55  
figure years and years.

Unknown Speaker  2:07:00  
yeast and said here

Unknown Speaker  2:07:03  
when I got here

Unknown Speaker  2:07:06  
I didn't like what I see.

Unknown Speaker  2:07:09  
And I had to be a part of that system.

Unknown Speaker  2:07:14  
I did it

Unknown Speaker  2:07:16  
but I looked around and seeing all injustice that I could see. Now justice but as best as

Unknown Speaker  2:07:26  
everything that we had to breathe well we went to work to school.

Unknown Speaker  2:07:32  
I seen that it wasn't given our coaching

Unknown Speaker  2:07:35  
things that we really needed as far as blankets.

Unknown Speaker  2:07:39  
So me, being me see,

Unknown Speaker  2:07:43  
I had to think of something to do.

Unknown Speaker  2:07:45  
First of all,

Unknown Speaker  2:07:48  
sisters, do you know yourself worth

Unknown Speaker  2:07:52  
regards to the time we have to do

Unknown Speaker  2:07:55  
this still have to know yourself worth. Your voice matters. You think that

Unknown Speaker  2:08:00  
Don't wanna hear you, but

Unknown Speaker  2:08:03  
can you like all my teachers, long life?

Unknown Speaker  2:08:09  
Candy booty,

Unknown Speaker  2:08:12  
Lara, Linda Evans delsea

Unknown Speaker  2:08:17  
wickiup.

Unknown Speaker  2:08:20  
These are people that have impacted my life. These are people who taught me about the injustices and not wanting to know what can I do, Oh, I got to be here, Mississippi or Upstate.

Unknown Speaker  2:08:34  
Because I want to make a difference.

Unknown Speaker  2:08:37  
So let's

Unknown Speaker  2:08:39  
talk about what we're going to do. Who can I encourage you to go to school? Who can I encourage to get education? Because when I first was in federal prison, I couldn't sign up. I wanted to sign up for college but I couldn't sign up back in because I had two licenses. So I have to go to

Unknown Speaker  2:09:00  
The bottom of the list and let those who had dates that was in prison go before me.

Unknown Speaker  2:09:08  
So my man kept going further and further I got to think of something to do, but I have to do

Unknown Speaker  2:09:13  
to get me a skill.

Unknown Speaker  2:09:15  
So I became the best furniture

Unknown Speaker  2:09:20  
and the penitentiary

Unknown Speaker  2:09:22  
and they call for me to go to every penitentiary that they will opening and other places to build the furniture, the deaths, the chairs, the bookcases, the trash pans, and those

Unknown Speaker  2:09:35  
because I needed a way to express my anger was feeling behind what I was

Unknown Speaker  2:09:43  
doing. And when I was a club and what I had become a part of, it wasn't good.

Unknown Speaker  2:09:50  
Okay, I'm glad to be here. But can't something change about the conditions? What about the medical

Unknown Speaker  2:10:00  
So something to do. So that's why I started in federal prison. And I thought it would be when I got to state prison and it was like,

Unknown Speaker  2:10:14  
I just want to see a change,

Unknown Speaker  2:10:17  
change for the better.

Unknown Speaker  2:10:19  
That's it

Unknown Speaker  2:10:21  
is a thing called justice, not just what you give us.

Unknown Speaker  2:10:26  
Just what we are change and what we can do about it.

Unknown Speaker  2:10:31  
When I was in prison, it was like, oh, put on.

Unknown Speaker  2:10:38  
I went to for the oven to lead for about 10 years.

Unknown Speaker  2:10:42  
And then all of a sudden, when I got to Mississippi, or you don't get no transfer, you stay right there. Well, I got to stand my ground. And I have to do what I have to do, but a different mindset

Unknown Speaker  2:10:57  
with the mindset that will see change

Unknown Speaker  2:11:00  
When you start reading and seeing and looking at being a part of the injustice that you see,

Unknown Speaker  2:11:08  
he wants something done about it.

Unknown Speaker  2:11:12  
So what can I do about it?

Unknown Speaker  2:11:15  
There was a thing called Kairos, Mississippi. So who knows, I was just talking to people every day. They voted me in to be the Kairos leader for the institution. I'm like, Oh,

Unknown Speaker  2:11:30  
here we go. We get ready to make some changes, and we don't pray about it every day.

Unknown Speaker  2:11:37  
And that's where my work started in the federal system. Yes. But when I got to Mississippi, I just knew that I wanted to do more. I wanted to be a part of something different. My mother was from Mississippi. And she always said, Denise,

Unknown Speaker  2:11:55  
you go to Mississippi

Unknown Speaker  2:11:59  
when you want

Unknown Speaker  2:12:00  
Easy and walk like to catch more bees. When you catch more bees when you catch more bees with honey than you do with vinegar. So I moved in when I walked in and I say I'm that person.

Unknown Speaker  2:12:16  
Yes, I may have a stake in my life. I choose their company. So I'd say to our young people, stay in school.

Unknown Speaker  2:12:24  
Stay right here.

Unknown Speaker  2:12:27  
All of your

Unknown Speaker  2:12:29  
incarceration studies, keep doing it. Keep going. Don't stop

Unknown Speaker  2:12:36  
because you are the people

Unknown Speaker  2:12:40  
that help the future changes. Lawmakers is the one

Unknown Speaker  2:12:46  
who's listening.

Unknown Speaker  2:12:49  
They might say you might have a you might have an idea and bring it to the table and there it is. On the thing you need is the idea.

Unknown Speaker  2:12:58  
You just keep going

Unknown Speaker  2:13:02  
Thank you.

Unknown Speaker  2:13:03  
So Macy, you spent 31 years in federal prison and then seven years in Mississippi State Penitentiary.

Unknown Speaker  2:13:20  
And you just got out When?

Unknown Speaker  2:13:29  
Today

Unknown Speaker  2:13:38  
nice The story is is pretty amazing.

Unknown Speaker  2:13:42  
So eight years over your sentence

Unknown Speaker  2:13:47  
because of falling here

Unknown Speaker  2:13:51  
to

Unknown Speaker  2:13:53  
cover life sentences they've never acknowledged

Unknown Speaker  2:13:57  
they said

Unknown Speaker  2:14:03  
And just use the microphone or something. Okay. Okay.

Unknown Speaker  2:14:09  
You know, and I think that's important. Because the next question I have is lady why released last year?

Unknown Speaker  2:14:18  
You didn't choose to leave immediately. You didn't file that and you say come back to leave the meeting. Instead you chose to stay here.

Unknown Speaker  2:14:27  
Why? I stayed here because they said

Unknown Speaker  2:14:31  
no Job. Job already started in file,

Unknown Speaker  2:14:35  
which was get the job to come out. See some justice.

Unknown Speaker  2:14:41  
The job to keep on educating myself the job to be well, people like our sister, Kathy booty and all the rest of my sisters that helped me teach me politically of how this system is right

Unknown Speaker  2:14:59  
now

Unknown Speaker  2:15:00  
justices need to be change. Sure why to stay? Why not? I'm an old lady now. Take a turn.

Unknown Speaker  2:15:10  
So I might as well stay and go for

Unknown Speaker  2:15:15  
this okay? And guess what? The people are amazing.

Unknown Speaker  2:15:21  
Everyone that come in contact with the amazing

Unknown Speaker  2:15:27  
so imma be right here.

Unknown Speaker  2:15:30  
Stand with people's advocacy Institute being a part of people assembly and being a part of violence interrupters and being a part of prepper messengers. That's all.

Unknown Speaker  2:15:45  
One of the things that one of the biggest things you do is the clemency campaign yes here in Mississippi and you are leading that work

Unknown Speaker  2:15:54  
around helping to release healthy to gain and release of women who has so

Unknown Speaker  2:16:00  
The life sentences that are aging in place.

Unknown Speaker  2:16:06  
We want to say no home. Yes. So can you tell us a little bit about your clemency campaign work for Mississippi with

Unknown Speaker  2:16:15  
there are so many people limit us inside this.

Unknown Speaker  2:16:20  
I mean 7577 with licenses that's old in sick now.

Unknown Speaker  2:16:30  
But they've served the time, like 30 years. I know collections homes and nobody says, robbery where I go. The second hope is when people say there's no such thing as Oh, it's the hope that you don't see

Unknown Speaker  2:16:45  
this hope.

Unknown Speaker  2:16:48  
This hope that you don't see cannot see the hope.

Unknown Speaker  2:16:52  
That's how people make it because I never gave up. I said I'm here to keep those same

Unknown Speaker  2:17:00  
Women I talked to every day, those same women, I went to school with those same women that work with. And I said to them, I don't care how long it takes.

Unknown Speaker  2:17:14  
And it was days that got very, very hot for me.

Unknown Speaker  2:17:18  
But then I had to do what I had to go into how seclusion and I was like that man.

Unknown Speaker  2:17:26  
I'm giving it to you.

Unknown Speaker  2:17:30  
Extra forgive this many, many years ago

Unknown Speaker  2:17:35  
for choosing the wrong company.

Unknown Speaker  2:17:39  
And it was just like the sister said, once you get in here, hey, if it was a part of anything, you're going down to if you if you catch a breath and somebody got a call, or you go

Unknown Speaker  2:17:53  
to a bunch of being a college, you get this sentence

Unknown Speaker  2:17:57  
and they don't want to hear nothing about it.

Unknown Speaker  2:18:05  
And so right now, how many women are you supporting?

Unknown Speaker  2:18:24  
Sure.

Unknown Speaker  2:18:27  
You might get a few blocks

Unknown Speaker  2:18:30  
out of college university.

Unknown Speaker  2:18:33  
That's what it is. The alphabets behind my PhD, I got all that PhD, prison.

Unknown Speaker  2:18:41  
Doctor degree prison. a va prison. Yeah, you learn so much. You would be surprised. It's a different world.

Unknown Speaker  2:18:53  
So don't listen to what you hear

Unknown Speaker  2:18:58  
you thinking good

Unknown Speaker  2:19:03  
125

Unknown Speaker  2:19:06  
I got a picture right over there. I'll show it to you. If anybody want to see, when I came out, I was so small.

Unknown Speaker  2:19:15  
And it wasn't from not wanting to start with the wasn't fit.

Unknown Speaker  2:19:22  
It does.

Unknown Speaker  2:19:27  
So

Unknown Speaker  2:19:29  
when you went in,

Unknown Speaker  2:19:33  
you had children.

Unknown Speaker  2:19:35  
Yeah, two small children

Unknown Speaker  2:19:37  
and husband. Yes. And some of the work that you've been delayed

Unknown Speaker  2:19:45  
in Mississippi is with our Mississippi bail fund collected some of our members might be here in the audience. It is the only bail fund in the state of Mississippi where we are

Unknown Speaker  2:20:00  
challenge in the cash money belt system

Unknown Speaker  2:20:03  
and get significant support from the National bailout. We're so thankful for. They're still here in the room, shout out to them. But a big part of that work that got us started this year was the moms they bail out. And have you participated by supporting some of the moms who did our fellowship, the Mother's Day fellowship. And you also helped to lead to be a part of a number of our meetings to help develop strategy for the bailouts and the bail fund itself. You know, k share with us as a mother who has experienced incarceration and being away from your children can and as a person who was denied bail, when you

Unknown Speaker  2:20:50  
were arrested, can you talk a little bit about why that is important? Yes, my life in prison was nowhere near okay.

Unknown Speaker  2:21:00  
Right. I had the hardest time with my children was left behind.

Unknown Speaker  2:21:13  
And I just didn't know how I was gonna make it. My husband was a paraplegic.

Unknown Speaker  2:21:20  
died, Florida, so Katrina

Unknown Speaker  2:21:24  
and they pretty much raised themselves.

Unknown Speaker  2:21:30  
I had two girls

Unknown Speaker  2:21:33  
who have amazing children right now.

Unknown Speaker  2:21:37  
criminalist as they say.

Unknown Speaker  2:21:42  
So, yes, when I left and children, it was it was so hard. You want to you want to know that somebody is taking care of your kids?

Unknown Speaker  2:21:52  
Yes.

Unknown Speaker  2:21:55  
Have to figure out I got to figure out something

Unknown Speaker  2:22:00  
So yes,

Unknown Speaker  2:22:12  
but you wonder the person who's the character, it's going to take good care.

Unknown Speaker  2:22:19  
So

Unknown Speaker  2:22:20  
the tears pass

Unknown Speaker  2:22:23  
and I did to get out and I went in I did to get out.

Unknown Speaker  2:22:29  
Get out on the

Unknown Speaker  2:22:33  
field and what I've seen today that makes me go and want to be a part of the monster is what?

Unknown Speaker  2:22:42  
The public defenders, those that are

Unknown Speaker  2:22:47  
out staff with their job and how

Unknown Speaker  2:22:53  
people

Unknown Speaker  2:22:57  
how you're raising money

Unknown Speaker  2:23:00  
No money. There's no money.

Unknown Speaker  2:23:03  
People give money people call them and donate money when they find out what you're doing. People will give

Unknown Speaker  2:23:11  
everything is not against us. And people want to have oh she could just go

Unknown Speaker  2:23:18  
oh yes they did. Our way this am table. They are now they put them on Mother's Day that find

Unknown Speaker  2:23:29  
out

Unknown Speaker  2:23:30  
about

Unknown Speaker  2:23:32  
you know somebody maybe just went in for

Unknown Speaker  2:23:36  
a parking ticket.

Unknown Speaker  2:23:39  
You went to jail for

Unknown Speaker  2:23:49  
nothing else. They just sit there.

Unknown Speaker  2:23:53  
Why

Unknown Speaker  2:23:57  
everybody deserves a second chance.

Unknown Speaker  2:24:01  
Everybody, everybody's not guilty. And some people might have been at the wrong place at the wrong time, because I've definitely picked the wrong

Unknown Speaker  2:24:12  
but I didn't know it was gonna cost me my entire life.

Unknown Speaker  2:24:19  
Thank you for that.

Unknown Speaker  2:24:21  
And so the the last two things that I'm not even working on because I'm work which

Unknown Speaker  2:24:28  
is

Unknown Speaker  2:24:31  
the sum of the work go into it is around shifting

Unknown Speaker  2:24:38  
the power and control of keeping our community safe or creating what we consider healthy communities. Shifting that power and control from beliefs and putting it directly in the hands of our community members of our neighbors of our loved ones of folks who are with us. And some of that wax comes through the violence interruption program and the critical mass

Unknown Speaker  2:25:00  
A program that your partner or your partner developing because we are

Unknown Speaker  2:25:06  
in some cases, so as a little bit about what that looks like in Mississippi, about reimagining Mississippi about that

Unknown Speaker  2:25:19  
anti state power going into communities and reimagining the families that you can touch to tell story to, Hey, I know somebody's

Unknown Speaker  2:25:31  
been incarcerated, or do you know somebody has been incarcerated?

Unknown Speaker  2:25:37  
This, how about we can get this thing off the ground? How about I need your help have to support us? How about love us for those students that's inside? That's also studying about incarceration and how mass incarceration can

Unknown Speaker  2:25:55  
about that. We have to do Oh, we have to do it.

Unknown Speaker  2:26:00  
We got

Unknown Speaker  2:26:03  
we got to meet Nikolas. You want to come out? How about Thursday night? In the people Sheila.

Unknown Speaker  2:26:10  
And I don't know sometimes I don't know what it is, I believe is Ricky.

Unknown Speaker  2:26:17  
Nope.

Unknown Speaker  2:26:18  
I believe this Simone, I believe is Tyson.

Unknown Speaker  2:26:23  
But then when I go out, it's like, y'all coming. Everybody's coming. When we met, we got a meeting in a place called culturals come up and support us. And that's where it all goes down there.

Unknown Speaker  2:26:40  
And when we talked about it goes down. So this is community members who normally are not at conferences like this. Don't even know they exist. community members who mostly

Unknown Speaker  2:26:55  
variety of community members from all different economic

Unknown Speaker  2:27:00  
backgrounds but primarily community members who have been most impacted by criminalization of our neighborhood

Unknown Speaker  2:27:06  
500 zation of our black skin and our black bodies and brown bodies, and by poverty and economic insecurity that is caused by a system of oppression, coming together into a room and deciding what does it look like for us to create a community that everyone can thrive in

Unknown Speaker  2:27:33  
a community that interrupts this violence, and recognizing this violence as a systematic of systemic violence, not just a one off one opportunity with one arm that one person does to another, but a harm that is much greater and it's happening consistently through the systems of oppression that then impact individuals and how we communicate with them. So one of the biggest parts of that work

Unknown Speaker  2:28:00  
Is our interruption of what we consider gun violence. Right. And we understand that that gun violence comes through through state policy that actually promotes the use of violence against each other. Right? When we have a state that allows for folks to purchase a gun without any real

Unknown Speaker  2:28:21  
background, check writing real opportunity for licensing appropriate licensing.

Unknown Speaker  2:28:28  
What that had, what that leads to is neighbors killing on the neighbors, because a gun is so readily available, not because they want it to, right. So some of the work we do is we travel all throughout the state and talk to different people and we hear their stories. When we try and talk to people even in Jackson in our community. And what we hear is that a lot of times when people are killed is because of a dispute.

Unknown Speaker  2:28:51  
That was an accident that they kill someone not because they really want it.

Unknown Speaker  2:28:56  
But in Mississippi, the garden is so readily available.

Unknown Speaker  2:29:00  
That it's easier to pull that gun to try to scare someone than it is to just have the conversation that argument out. So I've heard so many cases where a father has accidentally killed a girl of her, their son, their girlfriend's boyfriend, right? Trying to get them to just get off the property, not because they wanted to actually kill him, or her where they were getting to an argument over some leaves that move over into their yard. And they already had to mention, and they pulled out a gun and accidentally and killed him. But that's not that. That's not the intention. Right? So you have a lot of these interpersonal acts of violence. And so what we're doing is that this violence of action, incredible message of program is really about shifting the way that we respond to anger.

Unknown Speaker  2:29:51  
And then challenging the state and the government's create policies that don't just make it easily accessible or perpetrate violence.

Unknown Speaker  2:30:02  
So that's part of that word. And then father's Bible says

Unknown Speaker  2:30:07  
this is the

Unknown Speaker  2:30:10  
lack of knowledge of things

Unknown Speaker  2:30:13  
will put a person out in the street, right in

Unknown Speaker  2:30:19  
what they can do the knock on the thing, the first thing that goes to do this work

Unknown Speaker  2:30:28  
you got to get the culture what what are you going to get for what you gonna do?

Unknown Speaker  2:30:32  
Can I talk to you sometime, sometime? sometime this stop it. But my intention

Unknown Speaker  2:30:41  
is to just have a course on

Unknown Speaker  2:30:47  
rational

Unknown Speaker  2:30:49  
behavior.

Unknown Speaker  2:30:52  
Can we help change the mindset of people who think about just

Unknown Speaker  2:31:01  
Not everybody. Some people have mental issues.

Unknown Speaker  2:31:06  
But it's so hard

Unknown Speaker  2:31:09  
and doing the work until I like you right here because you got to get out in the field and go to network. Oh, sure we have a field.

Unknown Speaker  2:31:19  
I have a fear every day.

Unknown Speaker  2:31:26  
If I win at the prison system, you go.

Unknown Speaker  2:31:38  
So, so violence is real. Yes. And he talks a lot, Mary acaba, and James Gilmore, and

Unknown Speaker  2:31:48  
everyone talks yesterday about abolition.

Unknown Speaker  2:31:52  
And we talked a lot about what does it look like to center the solutions and not the problem of it?

Unknown Speaker  2:32:00  
Right upon. And I think that's real. Right. I agree with that notion. And so in the work that we're doing, we focus a lot of our energy on defining the solutions, as opposed to focusing the greater amount of our attention on redefining the issues, right? We spend a lot of time on solution development because we find that to be the hardest, and also takes the longest. And so one of the things that we recognize and that when we center in our work is this understanding of collective

Unknown Speaker  2:32:36  
decision making and community lead governments. And so I have a slide right there. And I want it easy to start by sharing the work that that she's been involved in and giving context around who she is. Because what we really have to understand is that as academics as advocates,

Unknown Speaker  2:33:00  
Is as folks who have not experienced those carceral settings who have not been behind those cages, who oftentimes have been removed to some extent from that hunger that you feel from abject poverty. Sometimes we forget what that feels like. We have to put ourselves and humble ourselves to put us back in a situation where we're listening deeply. And I know you all have heard this over and over again this weekend this week.

Unknown Speaker  2:33:33  
But I think it's important to continue to hear that becomes normal when you're making decisions. And so what our processes is that we say leadership from those that had the lived experience of what we're fighting against. And so this collective process means that even when we are engaged in the process of deciding electoral politics, and what does that mean to engage in that? Right and those agendas,

Unknown Speaker  2:34:00  
So one of the things that we did is I was the campaign manager for my brother shuffling in parliament was mayoral election in Jackson, Mississippi, which he won, right? I get

Unknown Speaker  2:34:15  
that victory came not because he was so smart, or the team was so smart. It was because the people were so smart. The people were so smart in and making it clear the priorities that existed that needed to be changed in Jackson. And so we developed a people's platform that came directly from meetings with community members, people's assemblies with community members that may have specific issues that they were having and then solutions. And so our platform directly related to exactly what folks was saying was necessary. We would do have what we consider that grass roots right, organized and most importantly, that bottom up guns

Unknown Speaker  2:35:01  
So dismissing this understanding of just representative governments where you have someone that you elect into a government office that then decides what and when you have the opportunity to change policy, to shifting it to where you understand that as the politician as the representative, the person in political office, the job main duty, is to actually get in here from the people most impacted and have that decision come from them. And so if you go to the next slide,

Unknown Speaker  2:35:33  
I'm just gonna

Unknown Speaker  2:35:35  
be clicking and I might need to stand up there and click some

Unknown Speaker  2:35:41  
out there, that's fine. So I'm just gonna

Unknown Speaker  2:35:47  
we can just click you know, like maybe counter to just kind of click so I'm gonna stop right there actually. So one of the things that you know, you have Mississippi and handling highways right exactly.

Unknown Speaker  2:36:00  
Right. That's right. track it up by ancestry. Okay, so

Unknown Speaker  2:36:09  
Alabama taught us that the leadership is is Fannie Lou Hamer. So one of the things we push as these people's assemblies, this this process of community led decision making a governance

Unknown Speaker  2:36:20  
process that needs to be talked about that we're doing now came from a process of a People's Assembly, right several People's Assembly over the past couple of years. And so Fannie Lou Hamer held one of the first people's assemblies in modern times and Mississippi, when she the folks at the Southern Christian Leadership Conference and a number of other folks came together and decided that they were going to hold n double A CP came together said they were going to hold a microphone. They organized over 80,000 people, primarily black people to come out and hold a microphone to show that the Black Bolt Action

Unknown Speaker  2:37:00  
matter, because at that time in the 1960s, they didn't even have the right to vote. So they said, We don't show you what our vote can do. So they had a mock vote 80,000 people came out and in organizing the vote from that they also that had a meeting, which they call it an assembly. It was actually a People's Assembly where they decided to create what we now know as the Mississippi democratic Freedom Party. Right, which is one of the main institutions that help to actually get the voting rights Civil Rights Act of 1965. That's huge. So we shout out Fannie Lou Hamer, because she's one of our ancestral mentors that teaches us that the leadership is us. And then our banker. Right here Mississippi, coined that phrase and until every

Unknown Speaker  2:37:55  
one of the chapters child

Unknown Speaker  2:37:57  
I can remember y'all sorry, I just forgot them.

Unknown Speaker  2:38:00  
But basically that song that,

Unknown Speaker  2:38:04  
that until we all free, none of us are free, right? And understanding that we don't need one person to lead us but that we all lead and all of our leadership is in different ways. And that's extremely important. And so that's where we guys get our understanding from our teachings from this from this philosophy that the leadership is us. The first issue we go back is an image that comes from this new campaign called love Jackson saving ourselves that we're developing.

Unknown Speaker  2:38:34  
in Jackson, Mississippi, like the most black metropolitan areas, the city is considered to be dangerous. As soon as it becomes too black, it becomes too dangerous. As soon as it becomes too black and needs more police offices, as soon as it becomes too black or brown, you know, you have higher rates of incarceration, right. And so you also have this understanding. That is everyone is like

Unknown Speaker  2:39:00  
in fear. And so what this campaign which was actually developed by a couple of our members that you'll see later on in this in came from the People's Assembly, also, from community members in the assembly is a campaign to like literally take back the narrative about our city

Unknown Speaker  2:39:15  
and say, love Jackson, we're saving ourselves. So it's about highlighting folks like community that are actually leading this change around taking control from traditional methods of safety, and create a new methods that are rooted in community. So some of the images that you'll see in the boil boards and things that we're promoting our images of just happiness and joy.

Unknown Speaker  2:39:41  
Right, because we are that, right? Like, yes, we are living through a lot of trauma. But we also live and having that joy and happiness and we want to remember that. And so this is an image of some young people. That's an image of one of our lead by

Unknown Speaker  2:40:00  
interrupters and credible messengers Toronto or in the middle of his wife and daughter. Right? And it shows them and a happy setting my because they doing that kind of work. The first segment you saw was a children. The majority of the children in that picture have survived living without at least one of their parents and sometimes both of their parents because they are parent was incarcerated. Right? But they still have joy, right? Because we can actually

Unknown Speaker  2:40:29  
you can keep going.

Unknown Speaker  2:40:33  
The next image is and that's one of our enough one of our credible messengers because people forget, like in Mississippi poverty is real.

Unknown Speaker  2:40:45  
And a lot of white folks that are living in poverty are literally just left out of the equation.

Unknown Speaker  2:40:52  
And so this image is a one of our credible messages. Vinny Ivy's wife who awesome

Unknown Speaker  2:41:00  
Is formerly incarcerated, but to show the joy and not like literally, white folks do, actually Linda Johnson that they scare they actually happy. Right? So show us some images of that. And then we can keep going.

Unknown Speaker  2:41:18  
You know, if you could just keep clicking. And then they'll just be images, right, these images of, of happiness of joy.

Unknown Speaker  2:41:26  
And we're going to be putting up these images and many more that I don't have included here

Unknown Speaker  2:41:32  
to really just highlight the love that exists within all of us. And then I say, if you don't mind, just click in

Unknown Speaker  2:41:47  
and it's beautiful. It's perfect because now

Unknown Speaker  2:41:51  
we're going to wrap up soon, but I'm getting into the part of this community led governance has which has really been anchored by

Unknown Speaker  2:42:00  
My sister and z friends for mechanics and but who just joined us

Unknown Speaker  2:42:12  
and

Unknown Speaker  2:42:14  
and so the images that you'll see now, artist images of us in deep community decision making processes, right. So from our work and supporting the second largest ice rain in US history that happened in August on August 7 of this year 2019 here in Mississippi, where 700 about 680 right of our lights, a nice brown community members were arrested, and many over half of them incarcerated in jails and prisons and immigration detention facilities throughout our state and in Louisiana.

Unknown Speaker  2:43:00  
There was a massive community led effort to release them and to support them and it continues to this day, right? We see images of

Unknown Speaker  2:43:12  
community members just literally engaging in different mic work and leading a work. Most of the community members to the point of that work is that we set our folks who are what we consider living in the most marginalized communities. So those are areas that are often forgotten, neglected and resources aren't really making it that way. And so they are leaving this wiring so a lot of that those images you see, I those are folks that are here the mechanics

Unknown Speaker  2:43:43  
we want to definitely make sure we introduce you. Right.

Unknown Speaker  2:43:48  
Why because the work is great.

Unknown Speaker  2:43:52  
I have mentioned the People's Assembly process

Unknown Speaker  2:43:56  
and

Unknown Speaker  2:43:59  
it is

Unknown Speaker  2:44:00  
is a process that has existed for many, many years, all around the world

Unknown Speaker  2:44:06  
in Mississippi and

Unknown Speaker  2:44:08  
told that it existed as a for former slaves are not former slaves, African people who were enslaved while they were on the plantation

Unknown Speaker  2:44:20  
during slavery organizing themselves in the slave is to determine how we become government. Right? How we want to make decisions about how folks, you know, interactive when someone committed harm against another person. So deciding, you know, who was going to be the person that was responsible for marriages to a number of other decision making processes, we saw it again emerge over and over again and other forms, including the Mississippi freedom Democratic Party, which we just saw, and we use it today in Jackson, Mississippi as a way for community to lead governments. So here in Mississippi and Jackson, specifically, we have our first participatory

Unknown Speaker  2:45:00  
budgeting assembly where residents created the people's agenda, the people's, I'm sorry, the people's budget. And so it was the first budget that

Unknown Speaker  2:45:11  
residents actually had a say in the priorities of the city budget and not just some small amount of money that we were going to get some make a decision around. But we actually have a say in the entire budget. And that's pretty big. And so we look forward to having more saying that.

Unknown Speaker  2:45:27  
So what kind of do you want to introduce yourself?

Unknown Speaker  2:45:34  
So one or want to apologize for the late

Unknown Speaker  2:45:38  
two.

Unknown Speaker  2:45:41  
I do want to offer greetings from my brother Robin Kelly was supposed to be here, and they actually asked me to so we're wrapping up a little bit so I'm just going to one say greetings. He does so wanting to be here and a family

Unknown Speaker  2:45:57  
and and so when we ended up

Unknown Speaker  2:46:00  
And I really appreciate Garrett and folks here because they might okay with distinguish Jackson

Unknown Speaker  2:46:08  
which he was really what he wanted to do was moderating ask questions being conversation with Ricky NBC. And so that ended up being all of us right?

Unknown Speaker  2:46:20  
What I want to acknowledge that for those who thought he might be coming in expecting you to come

Unknown Speaker  2:46:27  
the second thing I want to do rather than really introduce myself is really see how, how honored I am to be on the stage with these two women. And at the top that have black women really lead the decks and you know, I'm, I get to support them, you know, half the time along the row.

Unknown Speaker  2:46:53  
And I try to be supportive. I'm a part of the people's families. I'm so proud of it and love what he comes up

Unknown Speaker  2:47:00  
It and in these women, Dr. Sophia miry. There's just a whole range of folks that

Unknown Speaker  2:47:11  
the whole this project how

Unknown Speaker  2:47:15  
and and range in age. No, it's truly intergenerational.

Unknown Speaker  2:47:21  
Like, like, like up here, these youngsters over here

Unknown Speaker  2:47:28  
and who are who are amazing leaders and I've learned so much from all the time. I think part of the other thing I want to say to is that, particularly Ricky,

Unknown Speaker  2:47:43  
who

Unknown Speaker  2:47:45  
right there

Unknown Speaker  2:47:47  
who hold so much more

Unknown Speaker  2:47:51  
in addition to the People's Assembly, where she ran your brother's campaign successful campaign for mayor, she holds a laptop job

Unknown Speaker  2:48:00  
This project the movement for Black Lives, it's helped a black people get elected all over the country. She hold so much of the organizing work, the actual organizing work that happens on the ground, because the People's Assembly project is only as good as who we listen to. Right? It's, it's about when we listened to and, and particularly the participatory budgeting piece, which was a collaboration or the city. And I also want to shout out,

Unknown Speaker  2:48:34  
you know, Robert, Dr. Robert blading, did you I don't know if you talked about him at all, but our chief administrative officer he made up his own participatory budgeting. I mean, when I say made it up, I made the cards the money, the whole thing, the boxes, so that the people Jackson could have a popular education entryway into how to think about budgeting. And so it's a

Unknown Speaker  2:49:00  
extraordinary place. It's also in some ways ordinary, right? We have all the things the issues with the police the

Unknown Speaker  2:49:10  
live in South Texas where we have extra insurance checks not like they don't happen in affluent neighborhoods and we're still struggling I don't want to make it seem like a mecca, or, or a utopia. But

Unknown Speaker  2:49:25  
But I think in large part thanks to Ricky's leadership is a lot of focus on organizing is not a focus on listening. There's a lot of focus on ways in which the car school system is not like this segregated thing in a corner over here but it's a part of the entire framework for how people think about the city.

Unknown Speaker  2:49:47  
And and how we think about how we flourish.

Unknown Speaker  2:49:52  
And I'm also really grateful for the whole crew at TI in, in Jackson because they are

Unknown Speaker  2:50:00  
We really have soldiers that are out there on the streets. They're talking to folks. They're super engaged. And and I'll just tell this one short story that was not about participatory budgeting. But it was about the People's Assembly around crime and safety.

Unknown Speaker  2:50:20  
And I'm going to tell you family.

Unknown Speaker  2:50:23  
It was interesting. Right? And,

Unknown Speaker  2:50:28  
and, you know,

Unknown Speaker  2:50:31  
when you work with all kinds of people, it gets interesting. It's not like all the people you agree with, right?

Unknown Speaker  2:50:39  
And I'm gonna tell you how big the range was, the rage was so big. There was actually people at the domestic violence table arguing about whether or not domestic violence was really an issue for women, and that it was more of an issue for men that more men were getting beat up by women than women by then. Okay, just so you can

Unknown Speaker  2:51:00  
get an idea

Unknown Speaker  2:51:02  
of like level of political rage, right we just call it range.

Unknown Speaker  2:51:11  
So in the midst this you know, folks are working in small groups and figuring things out and working through and, and in trying to find solutions and ideas together.

Unknown Speaker  2:51:27  
And what I love about the assemblies is that the people who are most affected by the problem are the ones who always come up with the best ideas. We stay there. We think we mean it. And then we invite all these experts to then design some stuff but as the day we do it every day.

Unknown Speaker  2:51:48  
But when I when I get to see over and over again, in my small part is how it's so true that if we live with a you know,

Unknown Speaker  2:52:00  
How to deal with it. You know how to solve the problem. And in this case, one of the crews, the smaller groups that are about the folks who have been on the inside neighbor, had they, they want to have their own group their own conversation about what it was like, and what was next. And so they came back with they said, We want jobs, we want to have a jobs program. They they had an idea and What's also great about Jackson, is that in many cases, there are policy makers, usually,

Unknown Speaker  2:52:34  
to be honest, not everybody wish it was like you know, we've run people like nice and Ricky and see if we can change that get some folks. But they came with this idea. And then the folks in the administration took it worked with a corporate partner, C Spire, and then we're able to figure out jobs for folks based on the kinds of things

Unknown Speaker  2:53:00  
Books reflected back at assembly. And then the other thing, which is my favorite man, you know, maybe one day we'll do this, but that, you know, I love that the participatory participatory budgeting piece, the young brother who came up with this Jackson city of water, right. So we so and this is the last thing I'll say, is that you can tell that Cole to add

Unknown Speaker  2:53:23  
that this younger brother who's a student at Jackson State and

Unknown Speaker  2:53:27  
native to the area, he literally designed a whole hydroponic Jackson

Unknown Speaker  2:53:36  
that

Unknown Speaker  2:53:38  
that was just amazing. And I just keep thinking about it all the time. Because I think that one day maybe it might happen, I get it so so feeling so that I just wanted to share that I wanted to just love upon both Miss Niecy and Rikiya for their incredible leadership and work. I just feel so honored to

Unknown Speaker  2:54:00  
Walk around them. And do you think I live in Jackson right? Not only do I get to be around them, but I get to actually walk into safe places physical gaber walk in all of those things. Thank you. Thank you for your patience to begin here. Thank you all for all you do.

Unknown Speaker  2:54:24  
Yeah.

Unknown Speaker  2:54:27  
Yeah. So we're just going to open it up for questions. If we can go to the slide that really does.

Unknown Speaker  2:54:34  
It's, I think it's right try this slide. Maybe a little bit more about maybe after

Unknown Speaker  2:54:42  
you've gone. You've gone by later, not like at the end.

Unknown Speaker  2:54:50  
Okay.

Unknown Speaker  2:54:53  
Now it's like twice in

Unknown Speaker  2:54:58  
okay.

Unknown Speaker  2:55:00  
Yeah

Unknown Speaker  2:55:03  
this is something different question and answers I'm sorry but when the slide comes up out share it with you.

Unknown Speaker  2:55:12  
But same I have any questions I know this is kind of like the conversation It was kind of little everywhere

Unknown Speaker  2:55:21  
we make things happen.

Unknown Speaker  2:55:28  
My question is

Unknown Speaker  2:55:31  
actually a certain time

Unknown Speaker  2:55:38  
to nice and

Unknown Speaker  2:55:41  
loud when I change, the atmosphere been concentrating.

Unknown Speaker  2:55:47  
So, making in a mess Causeway to stop in concentration for the state of Mississippi. I have

Unknown Speaker  2:55:59  
no water

Unknown Speaker  2:56:00  
Finding the change loans to take massive concentration. So my course leaders

Unknown Speaker  2:56:08  
at the service so much time and being around people did Doing Time In lonely because of status or being things to lower numbers and with the love of this place 85% happy to fill you with a mandatory citizens in order to change lives the cost of the race. The

Unknown Speaker  2:56:31  
laws have to be changed.

Unknown Speaker  2:56:35  
Education is good.

Unknown Speaker  2:56:39  
But in order to change incarceration, amazing lowest numbers because crime is happening every day, and they're not known battlefields. They are violent crimes. They carry a lot of time in really lousy

Unknown Speaker  2:56:56  
day me. You didn't lonely to say it

Unknown Speaker  2:57:00  
If the juvenile we have not changed and obviously have been thrilled, because I had to natural license without the possibility of parole. In all the way that I treat today is because

Unknown Speaker  2:57:12  
Miller versus Alabama they think was unconstitutional the sin of the child to die in prison, because we did not understand the consequences, or what we was doing. We were not mature in the scientific backing improving. So that low savings where the United States Supreme Court Justice said no, it's not constitutional. So it will not fight the change Lauer's for 85 this week, mandatory citizen of London later the same day, there's no way that we could change mass incarceration. Now we can educate

Unknown Speaker  2:57:53  
the brothers and sisters going to start the system to be more mature

Unknown Speaker  2:57:58  
in decision making

Unknown Speaker  2:58:00  
Heaven and ready to return to society because you able to turn the world back to society and not being rehabilitated. So you won't have those problems. But if we got to change,

Unknown Speaker  2:58:13  
know the maze normal people in the prison, we have to change the flowers. What now recently we go in order to do today, because every state has different levels. So whatever state that you represent, then you have to take those laws they combine those individuals here in state of Mississippi, I know without a shadow of a doubt.

Unknown Speaker  2:58:36  
85% Manitoba says and how big

Unknown Speaker  2:58:41  
is word overcrowding tourism state in the state? So how do we go by

Unknown Speaker  2:58:48  
that in order to change lanes customers? Thank you.

Unknown Speaker  2:58:55  
So you know, I'm not I would just keep pushing other people certainly process

Unknown Speaker  2:59:00  
Because it is a process by which that can happen. And so, in Mississippi, what we do is a lot of folks don't know that every year there are bills introduced to lead us to the legislators that x one for, for example, bail reform, right, we introduce seven bills I'd be around. Before we introduce bills every year around Indiana vitual. offender laws. We introduce bills every year that talk about

Unknown Speaker  2:59:28  
restoration of rights for people who are formerly incarcerated the rights involved in a number of other rights, housing rights and number of rights. And every year they get torn down.

Unknown Speaker  2:59:40  
We last year, we saw that we introduced the bill around restoration of rights and instead of restoring rights, they added an additional felony that prevents people from voting ever again in their life if their interest if they are convicted of a felony. So one of the

Unknown Speaker  3:00:00  
The ways or strategies that we're thinking about at this point in time is how do we actually begin to change things, change things and sitting on a hyper local level? So for example, right in your city, what are those ordinances that can be developed? And those are the policies that one decriminalized things, and then to

Unknown Speaker  3:00:25  
that actually protect you or actually give you more say, in the development of local hyper local policies. So for example, in Jackson do the assembly process we were able to come up with a human This was back in 2010. We've been doing a similar process for a while now. In 2010, we were able to create a human rights ordinance that directly spoke around the criminalization of black and brown people, specifically by police as it relates to racial profiling. So created a human rights ordinance that said, police and jack

Unknown Speaker  3:01:00  
Can't stop someone just because they look like they're an immigrant.

Unknown Speaker  3:01:04  
They can't stop someone just because they are black and can live in in what's considered area that is economically insecure. Right? It creates these protections. And what that did is that in the lead, it allowed the surrounding areas to know what they could and cannot do awesome objects. Right. And so we haven't and

Unknown Speaker  3:01:30  
I pray that we never will.

Unknown Speaker  3:01:33  
But we haven't had an ice raid in Jackson.

Unknown Speaker  3:01:37  
Because we have an ordinance, and it's very clear our city council, our mayor's office and it when our folks that doesn't like you can't come here and do that. Because we are going to fight we are going to protect our folks. So we still somebody's using, right.

Unknown Speaker  3:01:54  
Okay.

Unknown Speaker  3:01:56  
We're using that hyper local decision making process.

Unknown Speaker  3:02:01  
So began to push other areas around changing it on a statewide so we had that they tried to take that from us by the state is trying to take our ordinances away. Recently we came, we developed a police officer involved shooting task force that led to a policy that had never existed in Jackson before around releasing officer names around releasing videos with the consent of the family of the victim of the person that actually been harmed. And this was done by a community process. People really were all up in arms because the mayor didn't just make a decision around with the same names, but we are we have different place. This is about letting community lead the way. You know, a good organizer knows right that you can move before people. If the people aren't ready to move, you can't be moving in that direction. And so what we did is we developed this process by which community members to develop the policy around our police officers

Unknown Speaker  3:03:01  
use of force and I police officer you specifically around how the ability around when they are

Unknown Speaker  3:03:08  
engaged in officer involved shootings and disability. Right. And so that was one way and there's so many more.

Unknown Speaker  3:03:17  
So thank you so much. And you know, we work with

Unknown Speaker  3:03:23  
celebrities even more and help us to figure out how to change it on the state level.

Unknown Speaker  3:03:31  
You have a global village to grow.

Unknown Speaker  3:03:34  
You have a voice. So you the changes you want to see you.

Unknown Speaker  3:03:48  
doing amazing work is not talking about how to

Unknown Speaker  3:03:53  
organize

Unknown Speaker  3:03:58  
thank you for your work.

Unknown Speaker  3:04:07  
Also, I want to say this before I leave

Unknown Speaker  3:04:14  
this is not a comfortable spot for me.

Unknown Speaker  3:04:21  
Murphy is out in the streets.

Unknown Speaker  3:04:25  
I want to be brother without just told you I want to be the change that I want to see. So the mayor of Jackson

Unknown Speaker  3:04:38  
he's a good man. And I just want you to know that everybody in this room is amazing. And everybody has a voice and all the historians and all the researchers that all the whoever you belong to, because I know you got to belong to something good to be in this room. You know, and I know that you want to see the changes and for those issues

Unknown Speaker  3:05:00  
Sitting here to whoever want to make radical.

Unknown Speaker  3:05:08  
Just think again, when you put it all down on paper, you see where it makes sense because everything starts from it.

Unknown Speaker  3:05:26  
Okay.

Unknown Speaker  3:05:32  
So I wanted to end with this video, and I'm going to cue it up so that we don't have to watch all of it. But because the work that we're all doing in this room or hope to do is hard work is taxing. We're tired a lot of the times, but we also have to remember that there's hope that we want to maintain optimism. We want to maintain a space of joy in a few

Unknown Speaker  3:06:00  
I only know what that feels like and what that looks like. And this video for me is is part of that advice, Jackson, but ironically, is also the song that my mother was my mother my mother's favorite songs before she passed away. And it's by the sounds of blackness and it's called optimistic. And it's a video that Brandi and common in the Austin green project we did. And so I want to play it because I want us awesome. Remember that we've been here for the past three days, strategizing, learning, working, understanding systems, hearing hard stories, and

Unknown Speaker  3:06:40  
we can survive. We can thrive, we can do so with joy and hope and laughter. And we are one create that world that we know is a better place where we are living in a greater peace and love and comfort. Because that's what we're fighting for.

Unknown Speaker  3:07:00  
We're fighting for love and comfort and a better opportunity to be in community with each other. It's always going to be times the struggle is always going to be evolution that we have to make. But we're fighting for more joy. Literally. That's what we're fighting. And so just wanted to share this video. Thank you all again for bearing with us as we fumbled through tonight, just really appreciate you. We love you. We appreciate you. We land and be optimistic.

Unknown Speaker  3:13:16  
I'm so glad this is the last time I'm taking the mic.

Unknown Speaker  3:13:19  
So thank you so much to Rikiya. County in DC for for that amazing talk to run this out. So there is going to be an author signing for the speakers of the conference to sign books over and asked for books which you should know where that is by now. And that's our final event. So thank you all for for being with us and community. I'm going to hand it to the teacher she has one last request for everyone. So I'm gonna let her do that.

Unknown Speaker  3:13:47  
Hi, everyone, my name is Dee for Wiley. I'm not here to keep up much of your time. But I just want to thank you all for this comics at a complex thank you for making it such a success. But one thing that we want to ask the viewers

Unknown Speaker  3:14:00  
Love to get a big family picture

Unknown Speaker  3:14:04  
so I'm a baby bear I can work out something that you can say my commitment was something like that. But I'm at this time I want to sound like the guys that are kind of like singled out coming up with the chairs in the front. If anybody else wants to join me and have you want to clear like Jim Rosen these chairs out these go next time that's

Unknown Speaker  3:14:25  
everybody in the back if you start making your way to the front and sliding from front there, we got some stage jumpers. We have really jumped the stage.

Unknown Speaker  3:14:34  
here can you work on a move?

Unknown Speaker  3:14:37  
Okay.

Unknown Speaker  3:14:39  
All right. Everybody from the balconies should give you some time to start walking down.

Unknown Speaker  3:14:45  
It's a family affair y'all know it. Do I know the family? Yeah, there's no everybody getting a picture some kind of way. So stay on top of who's gonna take the picture from uptown. Some pretty sure with the beginning of the body of this picture.

Unknown Speaker  3:15:31  
Happy Birthday

Unknown Speaker  3:15:37  
please oh this song I thought it went on.

Unknown Speaker  3:15:41  
I thought the really sad

Unknown Speaker  3:15:46  
because somebody's telling some of the people in the lobby to come in for the picture.

Unknown Speaker  3:15:51  
I think they probably got the message

Unknown Speaker  3:16:19  
Come on family is a family affair come on

Unknown Speaker  3:16:25  
come on continue conversations and then come on and talk together. Come on.

Unknown Speaker  3:16:31  
Yes they jump was before you jump this age, you will be on the picture because we're taking it from other

Unknown Speaker  3:16:46  
people

Unknown Speaker  3:16:47  
as you are, hey, down in the lobby. Yeah

Unknown Speaker  3:16:57  
I saw we almost there. Yeah, we almost didn't want to

Unknown Speaker  3:17:00  
Much

Unknown Speaker  3:17:03  
like the train up song to

Unknown Speaker  3:17:06  
these people, people that are behind less they're behind that fixture there. Make it wait to sign you up here.

Unknown Speaker  3:17:15  
Okay, thank you don't wanna come up and stand

Unknown Speaker  3:17:21  
the people over here find the picture you'd be awkward and find that they show you to fall over. Come eat something, come to the front door, the middle.

Unknown Speaker  3:17:32  
Good girl, good place. And then life.

Unknown Speaker  3:17:37  
Come on.

Unknown Speaker  3:17:39  
T shirts. Come on, come on.

Unknown Speaker  3:17:43  
Come on.

Unknown Speaker  3:17:45  
I say I'm

Unknown Speaker  3:17:46  
saying, hey,

Unknown Speaker  3:17:50  
do they need to?

Unknown Speaker  3:17:52  
They need to promise me another game to get him. Okay, same thing. He's a man. I

Unknown Speaker  3:18:00  
I'm

Unknown Speaker  3:18:05  
in the lobby. Hey,

Unknown Speaker  3:18:09  
I may lose a few beers. I'm gonna lose a few things, you

Unknown Speaker  3:18:13  
know.

Unknown Speaker  3:18:18  
All right, you might be jealous of you but we got enough.

Unknown Speaker  3:18:25  
Okay, I thought would make the same we are.

Unknown Speaker  3:18:37  
Okay. Yeah, we're good. Ready?

Unknown Speaker  3:18:41  
All right, I'm just gonna just keep smiling. I'm gonna do a bus. All right.

Unknown Speaker  3:18:48  
All right. Yeah cheese or something along those lines

Unknown Speaker  3:18:53  
movie

Unknown Speaker  3:19:01  
There. I got it.

Unknown Speaker  3:25:28  
every conversation because

Transcribed by https://otter.ai
