Garrett Felber  7:15  
Alright, alright, alright.

I was going to do a five minute warning four minutes ago but just managed to turn the mic on. So this is a one minute warning.

Unknown Speaker  7:26  
We're going to try and stay on task

Garrett Felber  7:59  
Sam If you could do me a favor, wrap up whatever amazing.

Unknown Speaker  8:04  
Bring it to your seat.

Garrett Felber  8:40  
Alright, so we're going to get started with the next panel on prison activism and the organizing tradition. A really quick word about Q & A. We got to figure it out now. So if you feel like you have a question that's percolating during this panel towards the end, if you could just go up and form a line over there

On the right, my left and then we can just come up one by one because if we start passing mics will get feedback and you know, it's not pretty for anyone. So thank you so much. I'm going to hand it over in one second to my colleague Jesse loca saying thanks Good morning.

Jesse Wilkerson  10:07  
So I first want to announce, first of all, I'm Jesse Wilkerson. I'm an assistant professor of history and southern studies here at the University of Mississippi.

Unknown Speaker  10:42  
So the announcement I wanted to make #CharlesOverby is trending now on Twitter. So thank you.

Unknown Speaker  10:54  
Keep those tweets going. So #CharlesOverby #UMPrivatePrisons

Jesse Wilkerson  11:00  
You can find those tweets at the MUMI Twitter handle.

So welcome to our second panel of today, prison activism and the organizing tradition.

Unknown Speaker  11:34  
Dan Berger is an associate professor of comparative Ethnic Studies at the University of Washington, Bothell. He is the author or editor of several books, including the award winning captive nation, black prison organizing and the civil rights era and rethinking the American prison movement co authored with to San Jose.

Jesse Wilkerson  11:57  
He is a co founder of decarceration pa And now coordinates the Washington present history, a digital archive of prison activism into policy.

Following Dan Stevens, Stevie Wilson has a message that he has recorded for us.

We'll see Wilson is a currently incarcerated black queer writer, activist and student. For over two decades, he was active in the ballroom house community, and worked as an HIV prevention specialist and community organizer. Stevie works to expose and dismantle the prison industrial complex, and to build a world in which we deal with harm without caging and exiling people. Stevie is a member of black and pink and Sylvia Rivera law projects present Advisory Council.

Next we'll hear from Ori Burton, who's an assistant professor of apology at American University, who studies black radical politics and state repression in the United States. His research has been published in numerous journals. Dr. Burton is an active member of the critical prison studies caucus of the American Studies Association, and the abolition collective and is hard at work on a book manuscript entitled, The tip of the spear, revolutionary organizing and prison pacification and the Empire State, which analyzes the prison as a domain of domestic warfare.

Doctors Zoharah Simmons has a long history in the area of civil rights, human rights and piecework and we are delighted that she is back in Mississippi.

Unknown Speaker  14:28  
Darren Mack is an activist, advocate and organizer.

Unknown Speaker  15:00  
of Just Leadership USA when it launched in 2014. In April 2016, he became one of the leaders of the hash tag close Rikers.

Jesse Wilkerson  15:11  
He earned a masters of social work from Hunter College in May. Darren is currently the Director of Community Engagement and advocacy at just leadership, USA. So join me in welcoming our speakers and we'll get started with Dan Berger.

Dan Berger  15:42  
All right, thank you all so much is that I've been in Yeah. So in our thread, so we're getting ready for this panel. I was assured that several of my coconuts would have PowerPoint, and now I'm the only one who does. So I'm already starting this with some degree of embarrassment. But I asked your forgiveness.

Because I mostly starting this week with a great deal of gratitude to, to Karen, for bringing us all together for for Jessica for bringing us immediately together, and everyone else who who participated in this conference, organizing, speaking or otherwise, and all of you for being here. And in in the brief time that I have this morning, I want to highlight what I think as four critical if somewhat meta things about about prison organizing this panel is called the prison activism and organizing tradition. But I really want us to think about about prison organizing itself as as a concept and as a context. So I'll start with an embarrassing photo of me to say that that prison organization exceeds the space of the prison. Right? And when we're talking about prison organizing, we're talking about what happens in time but we're not only talking about what happens inside we're talking about A mode of engagement that could reach an awkward but inspired and frustrated teenager in the suburbs. And and could nurture and inspire and open up into a broader set of political and only political perspective but political engagement. So for me that began It began with correspondence with different longtime political prisoners. And that to to, you know, an established kind of literary tradition that many of us I'm sure are familiar with. And then that led me to my own intellectual and Scott

Addressing about mass incarceration and difference or connection between mass incarceration and a broader carceral state or sort of personal power within American racial capitalism. And so I've been doing that across a series of projects. And that informed my remarks. So that, that's my second point. Prison organizing is part of what Cedric Robinson is described as the black radical tradition. But it's also more specifically some part of what Charles painting and Barbara Ramsey and others have talked about as an organizing tradition. And this is why I think it's so important to talk about and talk about prison organizing. So when we all have the kinds of conditions of that, that Charles Payne and other sort of scholars of the Civil Rights Movement used to describe the success of the civil rights movement, things like a kind of indigenous black militancy, fictive kinship, and this kind of social relationships of nurturance and support and community that allow people to take risks in, in some terrifying situations to to confront brutal racism are not surprisingly found in prison.

And I have that those images, those, those processes of that organizing are hard to capture visual. They're hard to really capture what what organizing looks like, even outside of prison, but all the more so inside of prison with the various restrictions that prison maintains. I use this photo, because I think it's one that gets out the kind of militancy that can exist in in sort of prison organizing context, without being the more storied examples of

Large scattered audience which are obviously very, very critical, but I think and

Darren Mack  20:06  
life changing.

Dan Berger  20:08  
But I think examples like this I ever received three members of, of the San Quentin six stage and impromptu sit in, in the art of San Quentin are more of what what prison organizing looks like. Right here. The same thing six. For those who don't know, we're six, black and Latin x men who were charged with participating in a sort of bloody uprising at San Quentin, August 21 1971. The day that George Jackson was killed. five other people were were killed that day and these six men were charged. That trial lasted over five years. It was the most expensive trial in California at the time. And as part of the trial jurors went on a tour of the prison and three of three of the six that you see here, fleet, a drunk go you Now who

murdered

prison called New Folsom three years ago and and David Johnson were being led through the art as this tour was going on, and not wanting to be on display as kind of captives zoo animals, they did something very simple, which is they sat down. And that sitting right there kind of hallmark of what we think of often we think, kind of Southern from Richmond. It's tremendously powerful to be able to bring the work of incarceration in miniature right to a halt here we have three men who are not only outnumbered and surrounded but shackled. And yet their ability to act collectively and, and in solidarity was able to challenge at least in these kinds fleeting moments, and the race of violence and powerful institution. And so I think when we're talking about prison organizing, we have to really draw our attention to to it as, as part of a broader organizing tradition that that in some ways we're sort of more familiar with outside of prison, but that uses many of the same techniques and rituals and processes.

So let's think about point number three. Right? prism organizing is by virtue of its conditions, creative, literary and intellectual, as well as actually.

Right. So here I'm thinking a lot about work by Angela the events and, and Michelle Coleman and many other and many others, that the prison is oppressive institution, but the context of that repression actually creates certain political possibilities.

Right. So even though prison organizing utilizes many of the same processes and tactics that exist on the street, there are also obviously many, many constraints on what that organization looks like. And so that places a high degree of emphasis on print culture, at some examples that that I put on the screen for us here the fuse, which was a revolutionary new African publication produced by Yaki sales, also known as a team of Sharma that statement in the 70s and Red Dragon which was produced by need and others in Washington.

arm the spirit which was produced by klieman, aswad, and others in California. And there are countless other examples, right? These are dozens examples that we could choose from. And the print culture is part of a broader kind of intellectual heritage, that that constitutes present organized. Because the significance of these works is not only their ability to develop and circulate a radical political education about that importance cannot be overestimated. And but it's also about buildings from concrete skills, right concrete skills in, in, in critical thinking, as well as into basic literacy of people learning how to write and read and edit together, right. So, so that these, that these publications became away, top, incarcerated people could form and develop a sociality, right through through study groups and other forms of engagement, that incarceration work so diligently to, to undermine, and the fact that these publications, I think, increased in significance as the kind of era of mass incarceration was first sort of getting underway and should not be overlooked. Right? These are ways that people who were in solitary confinement, people with different wings of the prison and prevented from communicating with each other could still have a shared conversation, I could still so be part of a shared process of engagement. Okay, and so when we think about President organizing tradition, we should be attentive to to sort of literary and intellectual pursuits and understand them as part of a broader kind of creative intellectual process. And so that that's something that I think we need to need to be archiving need to be recognizing the ways in which this intellectual tradition of prison organizing is itself on archives, right. So something that I've been a part of in the last couple years is something called the Washington because history project as a way to to to try and document Gather stories from currently incarcerated people. And so that we can record this this sort of catastrophe for what it is, and but also kind of recognize it as part of as part of this history of organizing. And that project includes many of the things that I would that I expected it would have oral histories of newspapers and song. But it also includes a video game, a text adventure game that and need whose donation of materials help spark the collection, designed while he was incarcerated at the Washington State reformatory at Monroe in 1987. And I found this programming code and archive and because I live in Seattle, a student works for Microsoft, who, who asked if I had any digital needs, and she and I, she had built this game, right and that's true true to adds to the original coding The only fixes to typos and mistakes. But it's called the warden game and it puts you in the position of the warden running a maximum security prison facing these organizing challenges. And as a matter where you are the warden has imagined by this queer communist political prisoner. And so that's for free, available on the website who isn't history.org if you if you want to play it at home, but I think it's important to, to see how creative that organizing tradition is, right is shaped in the specific context and and the constraints and limitations of that context that people are finding, finding these ways to, to sort of carrier carry on the intellectual tradition. Okay, the last thing I want to say point number four, the prison organizing is about people trying to live a meaningful life in a violent and alienating world. Like any kind of organizing, it has its issues, it has its demands, but fundamentally, it is about world making.

s1  28:00  
Here I want to

Dan Berger  28:03  
hear on a close with a picture of wet next to drugs that my son has made for me that this is the most special thing my office.

Unknown Speaker  28:15  
This is a TV

Dan Berger  28:17  
set that is still wrapped up and tape in the box as I received it from my friend Jeremy.

s1  28:25  
Jeremy was

Dan Berger  28:26  
16 years old when he was sentenced to serve 35 years in prison for a robbery. robbery.

But that went wrong which he ended up killing somebody. And when he

Unknown Speaker  28:40  
was 16 and tried as an adult,

Dan Berger  28:43  
he told the judge that he participated in this robbery because he was tired of being poor. By the time I met him, he had been in prison for about 15 years and and had become a winner had big him, because he was working with the lifers group at that same prison where we're having he designed the video game. And, and, and was trying to figure out how he could be a force for good in the world. And I started sending him books. And he was getting quotes from other places. And after he read my book captivation he, he was moved. And, and some of that he sent me his TV. And he said that he realized that that TV was was a barrier to to his activism, as I've noticed from my own TV consumption, and that he he wanted he wanted to sort of dedicate his life to change and so he

Darren Mack  29:47  
knew he needed to get rid of this TV to do that.

Dan Berger  29:50  
Now, I, my time is short, so so I don't want to

s1  29:55  
talk for too long.

Dan Berger  29:57  
I remain tremendously humbled by this gift.

That was about three years ago they sent me and I heard recently that, that he got the TV again. And and I'm happy for him. Right and he still has a long time left, and I think he deserves a TV. But I think that, that, that effort, right I'm trying to think about what what the barriers are to to change and how how one can invest personally be involved in that struggle, is I think what the best of what the prison organism tradition has to offer, right, because prison instrumentalized is people that discards people, and it throws them away and will prison organizing does is it gives us all a capacity for

Unknown Speaker  30:40  
self determination. Thank you very much.

Unknown Speaker  30:50  
Okay, so

Dan Berger  30:52  
now I'm going to

play a message back sent in to the conference from He Wilson who justly already introduced him. Steve was so excited when we invited him to be on the panel. He said he had a lot of phone availability, you could call in and stay for the whole panel. And many times the panel was and this this is the phone, this two hour block is the exact to our block when they're on lockdown. And so it's not able to call in, but with the assistance of Casey Boone and whoever they want to thank we were able to record Stevie's response to some questions

Unknown Speaker  31:30  
that I had emailed him not

Unknown Speaker  31:43  
give a little

Unknown Speaker  31:48  
more you will give it a go. I

Unknown Speaker  31:54  
yeah, this is Ed Wilson. I would ask the question, I would say despond organized. When I was asked the question, I was stuck with that ever since we're doing physical work.

Unknown Speaker  32:09  
First because my concerns always say, What's for dinner for the except, and I've worked on this before, but it's also people. So, definitely focus on fitness,

Unknown Speaker  32:22  
but most importantly, because I look at myself as a good organized,

Unknown Speaker  32:27  
organized for

Unknown Speaker  32:29  
applying to design work efficiently defective people money

Unknown Speaker  32:36  
walk and therefore. So that was a clip from my work

Unknown Speaker  32:42  
in the semi that you have any so far for the publication cooperation

Unknown Speaker  32:50  
and these three are diametrically opposed to let's put an expiration flostor of monsterpocalypse

Unknown Speaker  33:00  
Want to learn?

Unknown Speaker  33:02  
They want to be isolated, alienated. They want that.

Unknown Speaker  33:08  
They want the public sphere. So the work that I do interactive communication, while bringing solidarity, and I'm

Unknown Speaker  33:18  
sorry for being late state Correctional Institution, they're just going to push a little bit.

Unknown Speaker  33:26  
Because for a long time, I knew something had to be

Unknown Speaker  33:32  
something wrong. But I had to work a language for to play some sports, pick it up and end up with a three year period coming from kind of lash out at people around people supposedly, and that's how it was a long time for me. When I began to read studies. Listen, I came across the open windows of belief, the abundance cookies, you know, liberalism found the best people tabulator the language, language has to be an emphasis at the present was taught that all of our clouds are not

Unknown Speaker  34:09  
your fault at all we be here at Comic to be able

Unknown Speaker  34:14  
to think differently to we're looking at those things. Something's racism, class teaching, simply using a phobia, also the HPV

Unknown Speaker  34:26  
and when I'm sorry, I realized a bunch of bullshit. I'm glad that there was some factors to think of what happened. And let us be a part of the people and then my neighbors.

Unknown Speaker  34:40  
Look so for me, that I have to go to place because I shall be here that helps you. Clean other people what has and doing that also good for compassion for other people could not have been able to place it wasn't another prisoner. It's good to share that. And as I've shared it on other people we're about

Unknown Speaker  35:09  
to start of it together. But you know, inside of it kind of hard to get.

Unknown Speaker  35:15  
Pennsylvania State Correctional Institution say it just goes to substitute. They're all against the book, except that they're

Unknown Speaker  35:25  
reading a book. You know, I'm actually in a prison right now on fighting for the rights of the week in the yard.

Unknown Speaker  35:32  
area. So, again, for other people to be able to get together. And it says, to do this without being visible to the administration, and that takes a lot of population inside of a prison because there's cameras everywhere the unable to tell you. So trying to copy that. speech is also a lot of cooperation. For to get exactly what you want to get. 430 go for one

Unknown Speaker  36:00  
To the Baby, you're

Unknown Speaker  36:05  
looking at a football game or basketball game, we'll talk about the big

Unknown Speaker  36:09  
difference, so forth. There, the covenant with one of our members was attacked by Stephen. a broken nose, DVD, well, they put themselves in bondage, I didn't want to charge them. And then the second, and you were able to contact or outside, Alex put together some of that campaign, they got me out of the hole was to a jail.

Unknown Speaker  36:34  
And it was solitary, he was actually empty.

Unknown Speaker  36:39  
So it's important to educate, cooperation and solidarity. Sounds good for tonight. For instance, out of here, I'm going to do for the invitation, which I do here, trying to get people are hoping for the solid people to know what's going on one, you know, the one who's happy to watch and listen to them, and be one of the one work together. So Be outside and the details of the support. The second question is about the relationship between inside combat as it is what I did I gave an analogy a bird and second the feet The movement is like a first episode our principles.

Dan Berger  37:21  
Principles

Unknown Speaker  37:22  
of ethics are the head of the bird. It was God. It will keep us on track. It was amazing people are clear. It's not about personality, it's about

Dan Berger  37:33  
it's about the work.

Unknown Speaker  37:35  
It's about the principles.

Unknown Speaker  37:37  
And I think the outside inside activists are adding back to each other

Unknown Speaker  37:43  
and they'll get vertical to provide street protection strong with one way to solving the other. The other side for

Unknown Speaker  37:53  
it what we can focus on the fly off. So the either the fourth the outside in me awkward to get inside activities are spaced out but as I listened to them also in the word

Unknown Speaker  38:09  
and they will be repeating itself stuff

Unknown Speaker  38:13  
in things out, but I want to say Lastly, if that

Unknown Speaker  38:18  
I want to thank Andrew

Unknown Speaker  38:20  
or thinka here for allowing me to participate, to be part of this conference.

Unknown Speaker  38:28  
For the next seven days of work you're doing, I encourage you to someone inside. I say all over again, if you're in this movement, which is working with someone directly behind the wall, here, we're all good hockey news to me. Okay, because I'm thinking I'd say that that formerly incarcerated. Apparently partially because things that are happening right now on the ground, you know, you can only look to connect with someone and I also make the point that everyone is not the same behind the wall. Captain central now here there are people that are here, the one that went on our conference without all the successes. You know, and we don't say that we recruited a team will be able to compete for this type of person.

Unknown Speaker  39:14  
So the people who went there and attack the system didn't have to read credits. And you guys think anyone needs

Unknown Speaker  39:26  
to go with that. Thank you.

s1  39:55  
Free Leonard Peltier free to loan to King free Sunday Cole live and all political prisoners.

Good morning.

As most of you know, on September 9 1971, nearly 1300 incarcerated men seized control of a major section of adequate prison in New York. They took hostages and negotiated their demands over a four day period. But rather than a seed, Governor Nelson Rockefeller authorized the state of assault force to seize the prison, resulting in the deaths of 39 people and the torture of hundreds of others. This is known as the Attica rebellion, and I was really grateful that Orisanmi brought that up and put it in the context of contemporary prison organizing, because this is exactly what the leaders of the national prison strikes over the past few years have cited Attica as a crucial moment in the production of revolutionary prison organizing, and it's not

Because Nelson Rockefeller killed a whole bunch of people, it's because the adequate rebels did amazing work and created and opened up an abolitionist possibility. So I want to discuss this theory circulated by the administrators of the carceral warfare state, that the Attica rebellion was not a spontaneous reaction to brutal prison conditions but rather a revolutionary conspiracy. In the existing literature on the rebellion, this explanation has been either ignored or rejected. And I think that just oversight and has incarcerated our understanding of the Rebellion is revolutionary politics. And so I'm going to return to this question. Before going forward, I want to say that my research on Attica began in 2013 when I started interviewing a former Black Panther named Edie Ellis, who was inadequate during the rebellion. One of the things that he shared with me was that his feeling was that he and others had failed to rigorously document and theorize the historical political and ideological development of the movements they lead. He said, quote, We have never been able to use the tools of academia to demonstrate that our analysis is a better analysis. He asked me to play that role. And so my work evolved in response to this demand that a more rigorous genealogy of black anti carceral, radicalism degenerated. And I've been attempting to meet this demand by drawing on the theory and methodology of Cedric Robinson and his notion of the black radical tradition as a reservoir of collective intelligence gathered through struggle. So what is the conspiratorial explanation of the advocate rebellion? A few days after the state's genocidal sees prison Commissioner Russell Oswald went on TV and said that he had no doubt that the rebellion was instigated by hardcore Maoists, later on his book all about posits that the tactics of this revolutionary In conspiracy included the following one articulating specific objectives prior to the uprising, to developing grievances that resonated with the demands of radical organizations outside the walls, three, determining in advance of the Rebellion who would handle food supplies and weapons, for calibrating the calculated use of violence and non violence to have the desired political effect. Five, organizing quote a carefully coordinated confrontation at a set time that was pre arranged so that an external demonstrators could be synchronized, and quote, six, the articulation of demands which the rebels new prison administrators could not grant as a deliberate effort to cause dissension within the state government while at the same time building what he called conflict unity. his seventh and final point was that captains were up Those quote did not want meaningful prison reform but wanted instead to polarize the people of the United States against and for the prisons as Paramount oppressive instruments of the power structure. While I disagree with some of the finer points of Oswald framing of these tactics, specifically the way in which he strategically overemphasizes the extent and success of the coordination in general, I contend that what he's saying is true. And to demonstrate this, I'm going to draw on the black radical archive of Attica, and talk about some of his claims.

Let's start with the first point, the notion that the rebellion was instigated by Maoist revolutionaries. By 1970, present authorities estimated that Black Panther groups were present in virtually every prison in New York State with between 203 hundred and advocate alone. Like their counterparts in the free world. These Captain Panther formations were required to read the ppps eight points of attention, which was largely appropriated from Matt's Red Army manual, as well as quotations from Chairman Mao Zedong, also known as the little red book in 19, in January of 1971, two years after he was sent to prison, a young Eddie Ellis wrote, quote, I've already made up my mind that there's nothing in this penal system capable of breaking or destroying me. I bent like a read in the wind, a float like a fish in the sea. I remember now Infineon and all of the other teachings I have had and fortified with this knowledge of myself and my enemy, I am able to survive even prosper and quote, and he was one of the men who helped lead the political education sessions in Attica. Prior to the rebellion. He was a close comrade with Mac Stanford who was a founding member of the revolutionary action movement. Stanford had made trips to Cuba during the 60s to visit his mentor Robert F. Williams, who had been an advisor To mount and an associate of Che Guevara. So not only were the adequate rebels reading mountain for non and trying to put these theorists into practice through Eddie and others, they were at most three degrees removed from our and other leaders of revolutionary movements. The archive is replete with evidence of communication between the Attica brothers and third world liberation movements. I'll give you two quick examples. First, following the submission of the Attica liberation faction manifesto of demands. A nearly identical document written in the Vietnamese language was issued by Vietnamese prisoners of war and consomme Island prison in South Vietnam, that was before the rebellion. Second, during the rebellion, the advocate brothers articulated a demand for speedy transportation to anonymous here in this country, which may seem far fetched today but at the time, the Black Panther Party had an international section based in Algiers, which was formally recognized by the Algerian government and was composed mostly of fugitives, many of whom had escaped from prison hijack planes and attained asylum in Algeria. During the rebellion, Cynthia bakari Austin, a key New York Panthers secured verbal agreements from leaders in Cuba, North Vietnam, North Korea, Congo Brazzaville and Algeria to accept the adequate brothers who wanted to leave. She and other members of the so called cleaver faction, were actively trying to figure out the logistics of making this happen. It didn't happen, but adequate was a Maoist revolutionary conspiracy. Next point, the idea that the rebels weren't really interested in prison reform, and that they knowingly make demands that administrators had no ability to authorize two examples. The first comes from a document produced in New York's Auburn prison in 1970. It's from the rules and regulations of the Auburn Black Panther Party, who described themselves as a revolutionary Action Group. Their stated objectives make no mention of prison reform or of improving prison conditions instead indicates their desire to overthrow the established government of the United States and replace it with the People's Government that would allow the masses to determine their own destinies. The second example comes from a published source, the prison letters of Samuel Melville, a white Attica brother, who one month before the rebellion sent a letter to comrade where he expressed excitement about the political consciousness he saw emerging in Africa. But he wrote that they needed to, quote, avoid the obvious classification of prison reformers and quote, he continued, when you come right down to it, of course, there's only one revolutionary change as far as the prison system is concerned. But until the day comes when enough of our brothers and sisters realize what that one revolutionary change is, we must always be certain our demands will exceed what the pigs are able to grant. So, we see that prior to the rebellion, some of the rebels were discussing how to tactically deploy unreasonable demands at the same time that they negotiated with the state for the practical proposals, which dealt with improving prison conditions. They had different demands from different constituencies. And this, I believe, is because they knew that what they wanted, what they really wanted. Revolutionary transformation, decolonization and prison abolition could not be granted by the commissioner, governor or the president. Some of their demands were directed to their co conspirators co conspirators outside the walls to you and I. Point three is as well as contention that this new kind of rebellion involved quote, a carefully coordinated confrontation at a set time that was pre arranged so that external demonstrations could be synchronized.

Unknown Speaker  49:47  
This was

s1  49:48  
a theory that his administration developed based on several different pieces of information, not least of which occurred on May 8 1971, when roughly 100 members of a trust organization called the prisoner solidarity committee marched around the prison chanting denunciations of prison slavery in class warfare in protest of the ongoing isolation and torture of those involved in earlier prison rebellion called the Auburn prison rebellion. At the same time that this was happening outside as the sounds of their chance seeped through Auburn's dank concrete walls, the men locked inside of Auburn special housing unit mobilized the collective rebellion by breaking metal strings from their bed frames and picking the locks of their special housing unit cells. They didn't weaponize the self furnishings as one of the rebels recall to me in an interview, quote, We broke the porcelains things off the balls to make shards and sharpest razors and through the shards at the police's weapons and quote, nearly five decades later, this person has no recollection of this being a coordinated plan, but that doesn't really matter because it happened. And things like this continue to happen in different ways because The relationship between the inside and outside movements had become so intimate that they were causing simultaneous disorder on both sides of the walls. Last point, the calculated mobilization of violence and non violence to have the desired political effect. The first thing you should know is that prior to the rebellion the rebels the rebels began organizing what they call tactical intelligence and combat units that were essentially preparing to carry out the role of warfare. Okay, the next thing you should know is that during the rebellion, the rebels chose to treat the prison police who are the hostage now hostage is better than the police have treated them. The lack of retaliatory violence is usually attributed to the discipline and values of the Nation of Islam, which is definitely part of the story. But according to advocate brother De Luca Gonzalez, a member of the Young Lords party, the decision to treat hostages kindly was guided by Mao Zedong thought And the edict that guerrilla forces should always give lenient treatment to prisoners of war as a way to disintegrate the enemy truth. So the tactical use of violence and non violence was not a moral imperative, but rather a political strategy deployed to D legitimize the carceral warfare state. You actually see this happening African states genocide or seas of Africa, there are guards who go on record saying that they didn't sign up to be treated as disposable. And so people on both sides of the of the was exploiting this and try to highlight it to show white folks and people who supported police, they were also disposable under this carceral regime. So that was actually a pre determined strategy. Alright, so to conclude, I want to say that the eruption of the Attica rebellion was not a planned action. The rebels have always maintained that prison conditions made the rebellion inevitable. Okay, so they knew it was going to happen, but the precise timing of when it erupted was contingent on a range of factors outside of their control. And so in preparation for the inevitable day engaged in the types of planning and conspiracy that Oswald accuses demo. And keep in mind that conspiracy is just two or more people collaborating on an illicit act. And so hopefully some of us are here to conspire, and Africa brother named Jonah on the wall. I believe that prison rebellions can be channeled and nurtured into revolutions. After Attica, he wrote that, quote, one has to nurse a prison uprising very carefully, to keep it on the right track. So this, I think, is the essence of the conspiracy, right? And that conspiracy involves much of what hamburger was just talking about in terms of the sort of mundane daily labor of prison organizing, right, that involves writing things down talking teaching people, right, that was part that was conspiracy. All right. The Attica brothers conspired and prepare themselves to steer inevitable revolution and evitable rebellion in a revolutionary direction. And I think that in and of itself is a lesson for us in terms of how we should think about organizing. Another lesson is that we need to take our enemies seriously. And we need to take the movements that inspire us seriously, even if their methods exceed what we are comfortable with. So I'll stop there and say thank you.

s2  54:41  
I'm just checking to see yes, it's still Morning. Good morning.

Boy, thank you, Garrett Felber, and all of the organizers for this very important gathering that we are here for today

I had never been to Ole Miss, even though I spent really my formative organizing years in the state, but down in Laurel, Mississippi, and Jones County, and have visited many parts of the state, but had not been here to Ole Miss. So it was a bit strange coming here and remembering the history of struggle that mainly African American people engaged in here. The battles fought.

The heroes and heroines we

Unknown Speaker  55:55  
lost.

s2  55:56  
So it's somber for me being here.

Dan Berger  56:02  
I am

s2  56:03  
the person with the least knowledge about organizing in prisons or against mass incarceration on our panel this morning, as this has not been the primary focus of my organizing work. Yet as an organizer who has spent decades working in the African American community and beyond, on many issues, I certainly am acutely aware of mass incarceration, and the horrific toll it has an is taking on black and brown communities across the country. And it was saying earlier, and we all know that the US incarcerates more people than any nation in the world, even more than China, whose population far exceeds our own at 1.43 billion, compared to our 327.2 million, and yet our prison population of 2,121,600 persons compared to China's 1,649,804 persons is glaring. And of course we have the largest or the highest prison population rate in the world. In 2017 and Egi commission report, titled following the Money of Mars mass incarceration found that the US spends 181 billion a year

Unknown Speaker  58:12  
on

s2  58:14  
mass incarceration and all of its attendant institutions. The Egi report took a deeper look into the money in mass incarceration, and found that almost half of it was spent on running the correctional system goes to staff. And these persons, of course, form an influential lobby against criminal justice reform. And then we of course, have the bail bondsman who collect 1.4 billion in non refundable fees from defendants and their families. We have the phone company That can charge up to $24 for a 15 minute phone call, and 1.3 billion. We have the commissary vendors will bring in 1.6 billion. And of course we have the private correctional institutions that take in 3.9 billion annually. Yet Egi and many other resource researches looking at this have found that the soaring incarceration rates and the huge amount of money being spent, have done very little to reduce crime or enhance public safety. So why do we have the system it is significant that our prison popular began to grow in the 1970s after the gains made by the civil rights movement, and the rise of black consciousness, black political formations and the election of black political candidates, politics quite politicians from both parties used white racial fears and thinly veiled racist rhetoric to push increasingly punitive policies. The phenomenal rise of mass incarceration is a part of the white backlash against blacks gaining political and economic power in our society. The American experiment with multiracial democracy is in the ICU. Life Support. my reading of Michelle Alexander's The New Jim Crow really opened my eyes to the enormity of the crimes of mass incarceration. And its creation of as she calls it, a new caste system in this country. My former mentors, civil rights and human rights, organize events and Harding, calls her book, a call to conscience,

Unknown Speaker  1:01:35  
and a call to

s2  1:01:36  
action. It calls for nothing short of a major social movement, a human rights movement, rooted in the recognition of the basic dignity and humanity of all persons. And of course many of you in this room are working on building such a movement. But we have yet to catalyze a large grassroots effort demanding and in to the massive document D unique humanizing and warehousing of thousands and thousands of human beings, many of whom are black or brown in a system that does not care about their life, their health or well being. So what can we do to end this system is the matter at hand to which we are addressing ourselves today and tomorrow. In my view, our long range goal should be to organize to take political power, putting persons in office, who agree with us that this horrid system must change and who are talented To we the people, and not the big money interests that control much of our political structure today. We must do as we did here in Mississippi, and across the south, in the 60s and beyond. We must organize from the bottom up for power. When I came to Mississippi in the summer of 1964, as a snick, volunteer, focused on getting people registered to vote, organizing the Mississippi freedom Democratic Party, and building freedom schools. I did not understand that that time that we freedom fighters had invaded the state. To help black Mississippians take political power. That's what I came to understand was our mission. Building power Of course, the white power structure knew exactly what we were working to do. And they wasted no time using everything at their disposal in cloning murder to stop us. While it is almost 60 years since snake por SCLC, the Black Panther Party and other formations were able to organize a diverse people's movement across this country. much has changed but many things habit, it will still take the face to face organizing, building relations of trust with the people beginning at the local level, to organize a movement strong enough to achieve our goals. We as I've been thinking about this and working in my own community,

with people in Florida who are working on these issues, it has appeared to me that we should begin or continue working with the relatives of those incarcerated, finding out their needs related to their own lives on the outside, as well as their relatives or friends needs on the inside. For example, many family members and friends need help getting to visit regularly their loved ones as you will. We could begin by organizing buses, man's or carpools to take family and friends to visit. I know about this personally, as I was married to my snick comrade Michael Simmons, who spent almost three years in the Lewisburg federal penitentiary for refusing to fight in Vietnam. louisburg was over 800 miles from Philadelphia, where I and our daughter lived. I was on welfare and found it hard to get to louisburg regularly for a visit. It was a lifesaver for our family as well as for Mike, when friends and acquaintances would take me there to visit. We can and should do citizen education classes with the relatives and friends of those incorporate incarcerated. All of these prison visits, what we learn from them, we organizes about the horrible conditions the lack of healthcare, the violence etc. We can use to help these family members Yet redress for this abuse, introducing them to resources we might have access to. We must build relationships of trust, that are a necessity for building grass roots bottom of organizations that are adorable and committed to mounting successful campaigns against mass incarceration, and to achieve political power. As we begin building relationships of trust, through support an advocacy, we must engage in Oregon that educating communities on the workings of the criminal justice systems, the power behind these systems, and how we can organize to change it for the better and ultimately to disappear mantle it. As our groups grow, we should pull in religious and other institutional leaders in these communities, getting them to commit to donating space and other resources toward our organizing efforts and the expansion of our groups. One of our early goals, I think, is to find and this comes out of my experience, not only here in Mississippi, but in the organizing I've done in the decade since is to find the existing leaders within these communities and support their leadership capacity, building just as snick and other groups were able to do during the civil rights era. There are natural leaders in every community. It is our job as organizes to find them. help cultivate their skills and to share information and resources with them. As we expand the numbers of people involved, we must to make sure that they are not only registered to vote, but are actively engaged in voter registration and voter education efforts amongst their peers. Ultimately, as I view and we are working toward some of them running for office, as one of our long term goals in amassing political power, we want to put people with our concerns and commitments in office to change the system, that these people must stay connected to our movements and understand that they are answerable to the group that put them in office. If we can vote you in, we can vote

Unknown Speaker  1:09:59  
if you can If

s2  1:10:00  
you stop being accountable to us, we must also organize the formerly incarcerated once they are out, helping them to overcome the almost insurmountable odds, to building self sufficient and dignified lives on the outside. Alexander calls upon us to develop what she calls the Underground Railroad system for the formerly incarcerated. We must help them with housing, jobs, job training, counseling therapy is needed, and must have all build a supportive community around them. We need 21st century versions of adult freedom schools or Citizen

Unknown Speaker  1:10:52  
Schools,

s2  1:10:53  
like the ones we ran in the south, we will learn only about the criminal justice system, but the American political and economic system and its systematic in justices leveled against them and how to fight back in an organized way. Most importantly, we must learn and teach each other, how we can change this unjust system through political activism. So our work is about change and not charity. Also, we must address the shame that many in incarcerated formerly incarcerated persons and their families feel about the mistakes they have made, and the crimes they have committed during the Civil Rights Black Power movement era. We also had to defeat the idea that some lives were worth more than others. If you will remember the signs that the methods Garbage work is carried as they marched with Dr. King before his assassination said simply, I am a man. This was an important statement for these men who are often stigmatized for the work that they did for living. Many were ashamed. So here we are 40 years after that faithful movement, and we are now having to organize under the banner of Black Lives Matter. We are saying this as much to the black community as we are to white America. There are many issues related to anything mass incarceration. We urgently need affordable housing. We must end the gross racial inequities in our K through 12 schools. We need to use the funds that put public least in our schools, as so called resource officers, who uphold the school to prison pipeline, to pay instead for social workers, nurses, guidance counselors to help our children succeed. While we must organize grass roots camp campaigns, to achieve this, these goals, we must never forget that it is unlikely we will be successful without also taking political power. We must organize a democratic grassroots movement that takes over the democratic party so that it addresses the needs of the majority of the people of our country. My faith in grassroots people's movements is strong. And it is grounded in what I learned during my 15 plus years of organizing with And being led by grassroots leaders like Fannie Lou Hamer, and lesser known but no less visionary leaders like unit. You need a Blackwell and any divine you Berta Spinks, Susie Ruffin names from the Mississippi front lines that you probably have not heard of.

At the same time, I am no Pollyanna. I know what we are up against only a major social movement hold any hope of ending mass incarceration, or gaining many of our other progressive and radical institutional social change goals we had, as Michelle Alexander reminded us in her book, to even return to the incarceration rates of The 1970s before the war on drugs, and the tough on crime hysteria, we would have to release four out of five of incarcerated persons. We also have to address the more than a million people employed in the system who would lose their jobs. They are lobbyists and supporters of the system that provides their livelihood. They are in phenomenal opposition. And of course, we also have to take on the private prison companies who listed on the New York Stock Exchange would see their profits vanish. If even we make a dent in the numbers of persons they imprison. They will fight us tooth and nail to maintain the system. But this is not to suggest that we cannot do it. When I was growing up in the bad old Jim Crow era. miles north of here in Memphis, I was told that the Jim Crow system could not be dismantled, demolished, and I fought with thousands of others to dismantle it. Now, of course, we haven't dismantled it. We made some deaths in the structure. And we have a lot more left to do. But nonetheless, we were able to change many of the more horrid aspects of the lives of black people in this state across the end across the south. So the system of mass incarceration, and the racism and white supremacy ideas, it rest of all, is so deeply rooted

Unknown Speaker  1:16:48  
in our political,

s2  1:16:50  
social, and economic structure, that only a sustained mass movement committed to take

political power can get us close to obtain the victories we must win.

Darren Mack  1:17:26  
Well, it's about one minute, you know, we'll be more than any woman.

But

everybody done. Thank you. Thank you, all the organizers from the MUMI conference for having me here today. And one of the things I'm trying to get into the habit of doing is acknowledging the indigenous land who live so.

So it was Dr. He would keep it

was also my brother was an episode. And also, my oldest brother, who, at that time had about 20 years in the system was it was an episode. So I was happy to be there for that reasons. But green haven has a long tradition of organizing. I believe that green haven was one of the first correctional facilities in New York State to have a mosque a Masjid. And not only did they have a master, they actually had two masters and green he had two moms,

or it was basically about the act of rebellion. Adam Ellis who was who was there at the time, during the during rebellion, he was angry at the correct facility, and a lot of other people who came out of the adequate value. And he was one of the people who had started what was known as the green haven think tank and think tank was basically analyze what was happening in the system in the communities with people that's innocence have come from. And one of the things that they found, this was like early, they 7980. They found they didn't report incarcerated men. And they found out that over 75% of new estates prison population, Cape of seven new york city neighborhoods.

Unknown Speaker  1:20:30  
And that's

Darren Mack  1:20:32  
one thing that was like that was like really a powerful moment on research that they did. And they started a group called the resurrection. The resurrection group is it is part of a think tank. And they also started like different types of organizations like pack political action committee, where students from law school from your law school will come into the facility. In a circle and discuss your about criminal justice issues, and I believe is still going on today. So in 1989, during this time, a lot of

Unknown Speaker  1:21:12  
people,

Darren Mack  1:21:14  
it was a lot of light business facility. People had 25 to life, and it was a high concentration. And there were a lot of folks who were beginning to organize around the parole board were not released and people have to be served the survey time. You know, a lot of people who had 25 years we've gone to the third, fourth or fifth parole board, and this was done during it at this time. Governor Pataki was the was the was the governor. And it was a lot of situations with him that was very problematic with all the people these put them on a parole board. So people was organized. People will organize A singsing. And what came out of it was a document called wake up. And it was about the demands that was happening with not just the conditions inside of the prisons, but also what was happening in the criminal justice system overall Gotham parole board. And in regards to education, because in 1984, as we know, the crime Bill had eliminated Pell grants from class of 80 students. So people have improvise and started like the resident resident, the resurrection of group, the residential Think Tank. And so people started studying and reading and reading from there.

On I believe in December,

which was like the month of Ramadan during that time, and there was a the Nation of Islam. They allow people who want to participate in the fast to participate with them, and people who were affiliated with street organizations like bloodline of kings, people who were full of liquid was known as the 5% nation of Gods on earth, and people who had, you know, who were radical thinkers. And I participated in that because I was part of, because it was like was a spiritual thing. And it was a chance for people to present and learn about the history and about an African American history. And during this time, people actually organizing for what was known as the y2k strike, year 2000.

And the plan was, it was going to happen in three stages. One was to everybody where is the state issued green uniforms, the uniform that the state the state gives you when you enter into the prison system. And when we go to the mess or cafeteria, everybody will wear state greens. You know, some you go with like state green pants, you have to wear that all the time when you move to Atlanta.

The prison. By the way, I like your own personal shirt if you want some, but for four week leading up to the year 2000, about three weeks leading up to that we wanted people to wear state greens top of inbox go into the message. And another phase of the action was when we go into the missile. Everybody Be quiet no talking total silence. And this is a this is something that's also done in new six prison system on September 13.

In actually, that the week, the week with the adequate rebellions of gold people usually do that. Some people do a full week, and some places they do it for support section 13. Go to the vessel and be quiet because the character is usually a lot of noise. Hundreds of people in a cabinet Syria a lot of smoke and a shotgun. So in that in that send a message To to the prison guards, that's something Something is wrong. Then the third phase would be the work stoppage. No one will go and go to the program or no one will go to the work. Unfortunately, the administration got window. And on December 23, they locked the facility down. And what happened was these informants, like, since I've been like, do some research to reflect them. Like one of the big questions that I've been having and trying to contemplate on is how do we do with Informix in potential performance, but I'm not going to talk about that. But it's an issue, you know, because what a state apparatus come down on you and you might not be a format that might flip and that's what and that's what happened. People who got inside of the organizing space had got flipped and pressured into an interactive format in a benefit are key leaders. I know in green haven alone, about 40 people were transferred. Who was it that some people wouldn't work for leaders of organizing, and then others who were just known as leaders.

to people I know personally like my brother, because he was on he was keep locked. During the time he was given a ticket for select for some religious material that they considered inflammatory. And but he had beaten another person that I know, I was on the same tier with. He got the same ticket, but he didn't beat it. I don't know. Maybe I don't know the reasons why. But he had like, he had material from New York Theological Seminary was like, liberation theology, and he got a ticket for that. And he was an ultimate shipped off. My brother had beat the ticket, he stayed. So I was working at the library at the time and What happened one day? The law, the law loving officer, this is the whole Jevons on the prisoner lockdown. He was going by the x people like Yo, do you want to work? And most of everybody from the law, you know, nobody came out to work and my brother was working into. So I told the officer like, No, I'm not coming to work. And then my, my brother came, he was like, Listen,

I'm doing some of the organizing, and people have deadlines are trying to get out of prison. You know, people have appeals the file and things like that. And the Lord has put a low lot of embarrassment to be closed. That defeats the purpose of you know what this is all about. So I told him, I think about it. And the next day, you know, he also came again asked me to go to work, and I decided to come up and go to work in a facility was left in the city was locked down for over a week.

Even so, after

January 1 came after the open the facility backup people were still doing the protests, you know, people were still wearing green not talking in a mess for we found out that singsing was locked down and people to participate in their peak a few people and cast Sakhi in different facilities participated. And the biggest lesson for me is what Steve Wilson mentioned earlier, was that we needed outside support, because people was trying to get support from the outside. And one organization one not going to name because it's kind of a big organization in New York City. Or December 1 prior to that, they had sent out a memo saying that he was against the strike. And it was unproductive. And it was people that people went outside who just needed to organize in order to address the needs of the people on the inside. And you can google this information you can find out Did they change the way since since that time, but what Stephen Stephen mentioned earlier about the bird and two wings, organizing and inside, organizing outside, that's all very instrumental if we're going to end mass incarceration, because one of the things that I believe that and the organization that I know Cody work for, is that those closest to the problem comes closest to the solution but furthers for the resources and power.

Unknown Speaker  1:29:33  
And

Darren Mack  1:29:35  
with that, I'm gonna conclude by saying

we need to continue to ask the hard questions and continue to teach continue to motivate each other. Because this is a long fight. And I will think we seen the we probably read about it, but we haven't seen the level of

opposition that some people in the past I've seen when it comes to fighting against the system. Thank you.

Unknown Speaker  1:30:17  
Thanks to our panelists for this wonderful talks. And we have time for one question. And if you want to ask that question, there's a mic up here at the front of

Unknown Speaker  1:30:30  
anybody going to make a run for it? Yes, here comes somebody.

audience member 1  1:30:37  
For--is this on, yep--thank you very much for all that you covered. I just want to add to the look through the lens of women in prison, and add that into the all that you have described. We know that women in prison or just maybe 10% of the entire population of women who are incarcerated even though the maid has been pulling up nearly twice as much as men in the last couple of decades, but I think that the activism of women in prison is important to just highlight as well.

There is a book that was written by Victoria law called the resistance behind bars, the struggle of incarcerated women in 2009, which was useful as a documentation. My own experience in prison over the years, had the experience of organizing many, many efforts, whether it was dealing with the AIDS epidemic, dealing with higher education, higher education back after the Pell grants will remove

organizing programs for ourselves as mothers in prison, I think that women in prison around the country of important major class action suits dealing with the Violence Against Women in prison dealing with the issue of programs. So I just want to add that into the lens and I actually don't have a question, but I just wanted to sort of add that to the lens. Thank you.

Unknown Speaker  1:31:55  
Okay, I want to do one last thing. If you are a current, organizer, could you stand?

Unknown Speaker  1:32:18  
And if you are here as a student activists I know we have students from Dartmouth, Berea University of Mississippi Kalamazoo college. Could you stand?

Unknown Speaker  1:32:39  
Yes, I think it was important that Darren and Stevie and others mentioned growing the movement of both wings with the movement. And I want to leave us with that. And please note that at 12:30, there will be an art lunch session, a discussion with the art curators, we encourage you to go to the gamow Gallery as

Jesse Wilkerson  1:33:00  
Some point at Barnard observatory and see that amazing exhibit. That's up and the artists are here is Zachary Norman and shaylen Smith. So with that, we need you to head to lunch. Thank you again to the panelists.

Garrett Felber  1:33:17  
And just really quickly, I know we're cramming a lot in so there's there's some good options around here in the area. I encourage you to maybe get your lunch to go if you want to make the art session. For those who lunches provided for if you know, you probably know if you don't, I'm sorry.

Losing your backside Yeah

yeah

Unknown Speaker  1:36:55  
To see some are

Transcribed by https://otter.ai
