Unknown Speaker  0:01  
to propose unique solutions

Unknown Speaker  0:08  
of the order, like any money sale or the unique solution.

Unknown Speaker  0:15  
And I know that my friend and colleague, Mr. Kelly said, Oh, we can open conversations you can do that.

Unknown Speaker  0:24  
However, something else that happens very often, when a particular problem is raised up to cast a shadow over the entire landscape of struggle, is that all kinds of people like the people in this video

Unknown Speaker  0:46  
that the solution will be found

Unknown Speaker  0:50  
by solving the

Unknown Speaker  0:51  
problem presented. So the problem is money bail, and the solution is just ending money bail. And I will give you a specific example from the private prisons. Drugs. I mean, close them off. I'm all for it. But there was a very, very long campaign in Texas to end the contract for a particular private company in a town or the prisons called Pluto, where immigrants have been detained. Right. Wow campaign contract ended. Take one person locked in those cages get to go home. No, no. The problem here is not only the women that produce any freedom, but also that many, many vulnerable people those locked up and their greater community did come to believe the ending that contract was going to be the key to freedom. That's what's wrong with misleading and silver bullet.

Unknown Speaker  1:56  
solutions to problems in fact The

Unknown Speaker  2:02  
percentages and the graphs and the charts and so forth, although all of that matters. It's what people come to believe and then put their lives into struggling to realize,

Unknown Speaker  2:14  
and many, many, many, many, many immigrant

Unknown Speaker  2:17  
community, families and members struggle to end that contract.

Unknown Speaker  2:25  
This is what I mean by twin to me.

Unknown Speaker  2:29  
This is what I

Unknown Speaker  2:29  
mean by planning. Yeah.

Unknown Speaker  2:37  
First of all really effective showing it I really am grateful to the Chicago Community bahnson for making the video into Tim and the veteran apartments to for, you know, telling their stories that they really

Unknown Speaker  2:50  
I think, you know, once they get to follow up on this theme is mean, let's not isolate electronic monitoring, as this one piece of technology on people's ankles. It's an ankle shadow. Tomorrow, JC JC is already got some that much better than the ankle for us, right? We've got we've got the promise app and we've got all kinds of apps, we've got all kinds of ways in which, you know, devices can be used to measure biometrics, and do all kinds of things that are way beyond the capacity of these devices, which are simply tracking location. And I think to come into to connect that to Mississippi, earlier on Garrett talked about the rain on the on the factories in, in Mississippi. And the reason the way they were able to locate those workers was because they all had GPS trackers on so they use that to find out to track their location, see who was in this workplace for eight hours a day. So when they went in there, they knew who they were, they knew who they were getting. And from from the information that I have about this, it was also it also took place at the end of a 70 hour work week for wisdom workers were not paid. So it was an collusion with the employers to save them money for the wages. And somebody and I interview somebody that Danielle Gonzalez has done some really incredible research on, on immigrant labor and our electronic monitors, in particular, and he's talking about these monitors, when they're applied to immigrants are not about controlling people's physical movement. They're about controlling the flow of labor in and out of the country and about restricting the access that people have to to government resources to pay to the budgetary allocations that come from healthcare and education and so forth. So it's, it's a much bigger picture. And I just want to make sure we keep that in mind while we, you know, fight to get off of Tim and company the same time, where is it going to be tomorrow? What are these companies? What are these companies dreaming up? And how are they going to continue

Unknown Speaker  4:52  
to make money out of it? And also, what's the kind of underlying logic that we're trying to help end because I think in the end, that's what What we're trying to work towards and I want to take this opportunity if you can show that

Unknown Speaker  5:05  
the thing that

Unknown Speaker  5:07  
you know the one that's

Unknown Speaker  5:09  
before then it says police. It's a car police.

Unknown Speaker  5:15  
It's a poster.

Unknown Speaker  5:18  
I think it comes simple for Africa.

Unknown Speaker  5:26  
Yeah, the next slide. I think it is.

Unknown Speaker  5:31  
I knew this was going to happen now. I had no plans.

Unknown Speaker  5:36  
You can't trust technology.

Unknown Speaker  5:42  
There you go. There you go. That's a takeaway.

Unknown Speaker  5:46  
No technology ever. So yeah, so this poster, where would you go with it? What's up there? Okay, great. This holster I want to talk a little because I'm an organizer and an educator. It's very hard for me. I find my meeting some things that are kind of guiding questions for myself to help keep me honest, and also to help guide me towards like things that are concrete ways. And that's my ideas and the ideas that I learned from everybody here and all of you in various different kinds of ways. So, right after,

Unknown Speaker  6:23  
during the time of after the Ferguson uprising,

Unknown Speaker  6:27  
I gone to Ferguson

Unknown Speaker  6:29  
a couple times on the invitation and some younger organizers over there. There was the moment that happened at the time I was still in Chicago. There's a moment that happened where, you know, Obama invited all the folks to the White House for that meeting and even pullian was the only of the organizers who refused to go and have a big kind of conflagration around. You know, what's going on at UT Chicago, there's always something going on in Chicago where the best I played Chicago From New York so New York is also the best

Unknown Speaker  7:02  
way so

Unknown Speaker  7:04  
don't shake your head No.

Unknown Speaker  7:11  
No. So one of the things that was really troubling to me was

Unknown Speaker  7:15  
right away the

Unknown Speaker  7:16  
body cam. You are remembering this right? body cameras

Unknown Speaker  7:24  
at the time

Unknown Speaker  7:26  
if this ends up being the thing that caught me when what will always have been for

Unknown Speaker  7:33  
the moment, right, but I was also yelled at by some of us, unfortunately, follow me on twitter will attest to the fact I was like, why are people pushing for this so hard? Where the cameras turned on you? Like what do you like people are just out of control. So I brought in a very bad like, quick moment like a post that said police reforms you should always oppose and posted on my blog, and within like a week, it became a viral post. And it was clear to me at that time that it was just that people needed something that could help them hold the line. And something that would explain why these kinds of reforms were pernicious. The broader than just the bind camp. Right? What should we be for? But also, what should you definitely be opposing at all moments in time, car decided to, based on that make a really useful tool about reform is a non reformist reforms that help us get towards the things that we need anymore, and they didn't know about policing, and you can find it online. If you've not already seen this particular chart. It's really useful. And it's really useful just again, to discipline us while also giving us something to be fighting for at the same time. So I wanted to just point out a few things that are the questions that help guide some parts of what I try to think about all the time and I'm thinking About non reformist reforms, and I think some of these from de Spain, and Dean's had a conversation about what are recuperative reforms in other words, wherever forms that are kind of mainstreaming legitimize the existing harmful systems, and what are the maturing reforms? and Dean looks at Peter Gallagher loosens up other people's thinking and comes up with some questions to guide us and I did have that up somewhere on this slide, but don't worry about it. It was does the particular reform or tactic provide material relief? Right. does it lead mounted especially marginalized group people promote backers young documents it does the reform to that doesn't tactic or supporting do that? Does it legitimately legitimize or expand the system we're trying to dismantle? Doesn't know lies the most effective for ongoing struggle. This is so important. Right. Is it building power? Is it building power? Because, as James pointed out, we're going to be struggling forever the struggle, what Ella Baker says the struggle is eternal. Right? It is true it is. We're just going to keep struggling. We're going to keep moving forward. And that's not a bad thing. That's because we are doubting we're trying to figure out how to improve. We're trying to get better new things are coming down the pike. And so we don't want reforms that actually provide no man no material relief, no reduction to harm. We don't want those reforms. Those are useless. We don't want those reforms that keep people in cages and we don't want that, right. We don't want while performing for release only reaches release marginalized. We don't want those reports. We don't want words that offer window dressing or legitimize harmful systems. We don't want reforms that don't try to reach at the root cause of the thing. We don't want reforms that don't expand systems, my god how many times already

Unknown Speaker  11:00  
or expanding the legitimacy of the

Unknown Speaker  11:04  
giving them more tools to serve them

Unknown Speaker  11:17  
quite a bit yelling at me that what else are we going to go for a million other things.

Unknown Speaker  11:28  
We don't want reforms that gratify people into deserving and undeserving. Yeah, we don't want those kinds of reforms. And last thing I'm going to say is, what are the logics This is Erica miners my friend of mine was great, brilliant person, thinker and writer and organizer. She asked two questions and I think we all should hope. What are the logic languages and common sense discourses that initiatives validate and or reinforce that are these logics punitive or laboratory Good question to be asking ourselves all the time before we start proposing shape that sucks.

Unknown Speaker  12:07  
Others will be organizing to do in five years because it is used to cage and dehumanizing people.

Unknown Speaker  12:13  
Good question.

Unknown Speaker  12:18  
before you're running around passing

Unknown Speaker  12:19  
policies

Unknown Speaker  12:26  
around the country that

Unknown Speaker  12:27  
are making tons of

Unknown Speaker  12:28  
money for these organizations that are basically surveillance factories,

Unknown Speaker  12:34  
giving them more power

Unknown Speaker  12:35  
over us over time, y'all know this was a hot mess. Can we make a case study of the harmlessness

Unknown Speaker  12:44  
opening, we don't repeat this again. Y'all know who you are. It may not be true, but it's someone your goddamn friend

Unknown Speaker  12:54  
over again, so I just have to put that out there.

Unknown Speaker  13:00  
Like some gaps i do i need things that I'm thinking about all the time. And I'm asking you what are the reforms we're offering or actually needing the tests around this. And as somebody who was involved in some of the people in this room, Alice and other folks who are co organizers of the campaign for reparations for police torture survivors in Chicago, all of these questions with Yes, we are providing material relief. No, we're not leaving out and especially marginalized group. Some of the people who got money what people who are guilty of what the hell they did, we did not go with everybody gets the money. Yeah, it's a glitch in the system. Quite the opposite. We put no money into the system. We took everything out. You pay us you teach about this. You get the memorial you to the grave, nothing going in to the system that we legitimize know what it's like working to damager Mises by showing the way that is used to pacify the press and fire people. So you got to take your campaigns within these larger friends and have these questions in mind to guide you and keep you going on the right track. So I didn't want to share that with us because I want to leave us with some tools and thinking that allows us to actually move in the direction we're hoping to move in. So yeah.

Unknown Speaker  14:34  
Five minutes before five minutes.

Unknown Speaker  14:38  
I also wanted to share on the full side of the of the lecture here.

Unknown Speaker  14:44  
The the work that some of our comrades have been doing in places like Kentucky, Los Angeles, and elsewhere, and more the point how people's learning has accumulated across vast distances and actually now across an entire generation of organizers. So to give you a little detail back in the early 2000s, so about 1999 smartphone people set out to stop a prison in California. And it became quite a cause because we did everything we could think of to organize against that prison. We organized with public sector, labor unions, farm workers, with the people who ran the the school water districts, you name it, we organized, urban rural coalition, we did everything we could think of in California as a country, you know, it's not just a state, it's a country. And in doing this, of course, to do this, we have to learn and in doing the work we learned, and one of the things that we learned a lot about, thanks to the insights of the late great jack daniels. Other people who've been doing Rural Legal Defense in California, to design to was to think about the environmental justice movement. And then to think actually more expansively for Matt, about environmentalism in general and environmentalism in general, in the United States of America, it's pretty creepy place to be very often, but not always. So the work that we did in California involved, among other things coming through in the most excruciating detail, the environmental impact statement that the state of California had some people like me with PhDs in geography produce, to talk about the environmental, social, cultural and economic impacts that this prison design 5060 people would have in that location and community. For me the map we learned and working with people at the Center for Biological Diversity, the central California Environmental Justice network and other groups and organizations, we learn how to cobble together opposition to this freedom using legal as well as grassroots organizing strategies to achieve our goals. We have an organization called the friends with the captain kangaroo rat. Like as our friend Dorsey know Mr. Nice Palo Alto, California, he said, You know, I was never really found in the rat until the sippy kangaroo rat came along to try to help.

Unknown Speaker  17:31  
All right, so we did all that work.

Unknown Speaker  17:32  
We also wrote a handbook on how to stop the prison in your town is available online, you can get it back I've modified how to stop a jail and comrades in Kentucky started a little bit after that. That campaign which unfortunately ended in defeat, but it was left in California It was built after having built one year every year for more than 22 years, contracts in Kentucky. got busy trying to stop a prison being put on one of the, the, you know, laptops, mountains that have been cleared coal mine and they started working in maybe 2005 2006. They worked on where to work they want. They use what we learned and also develop their own learning. But

Unknown Speaker  18:23  
what we have is

Unknown Speaker  18:24  
across space and time and as I said across almost an entire generation of organizers, the accumulation of the knowledge and the wisdom and the evolution is energy to understand things like a job is not a job. It's not a job to to see that. What has been happening in Eastern Kentucky is part of the general organized abandonment of the entire United States to understand that some people in some public and non public sector unions are aligned more on our side than on the other side. Others are So instead of being pro unary, cascadian, figure out in terms of consciousness and purpose, where to go. And finally, in the case of fighting, a couple of mega jails in the city of Los Angeles coalition there, worked with all kinds of people, including the Los Angeles Community Action Network grows, the people who work on homelessness, houses, issues, and others, and managed to make some outreach to the building trades, which generally have been pro constructing anything, right? I mean, what they they don't care what they build, and once they get built, so our job is to make sure that what gets built is something different. And if you look, and I know we're over time, but if you look on the Watson Angeles County Sheriff's website and go through

Unknown Speaker  19:53  
all of this

Unknown Speaker  19:55  
stuff, about these two mega jail they were going to build that have both been stopped And it took 15 years to do it

Unknown Speaker  20:03  
15 years.

Unknown Speaker  20:09  
Family see is how the LA County Sheriff's have deliberately in very

Unknown Speaker  20:17  
rational way incorporated incorporated that structures and mandates of social welfare programming hospital and education into the jail, they have absorbed debt they have

Unknown Speaker  20:34  
absorbed it.

Unknown Speaker  20:37  
And so part of our work is to get back, expelled again and the only way to do that is to blow up the chef's metaphor. And

Unknown Speaker  20:52  
I was not I am not privy and part of that I know nothing. If I mouse I will say nothing. Okay.

Unknown Speaker  21:00  
I just want to make one. One last

Unknown Speaker  21:01  
point, since we're on hope. And and for me, one of the most important sources of hope, in the last few years has been the organizations of formerly incarcerated people. And I think, I think organizations like all of us have known the National Council of incarcerated forming culture within girls, just leadership, USA, these are national formations that are trying to organize formerly incarcerated people. And I think we've seen in almost all the struggles that are dealing now with issues around prisons and jails and so forth, we're beginning to see the voice and the experience of people who've been incarcerated. People have had their family members incarcerated, those who have been directly impacted, and that's and that's an essential voice to move to move this, to move this, this this struggle forward. So, for those of you who are not familiar with those organizations, I suggest that you that you look very carefully at the work that they do. And also, you know, in particularly embrace the fact that that that they are at least two two of them are embracing and abolitionists perspective. And this this is really a major thing to have hundreds of cases an actual fact thousands of formerly incarcerated people who are pushing forward program and I'm we're coming together to make that program become a reality.

Unknown Speaker  22:15  
Awesome. Thank you. Questions, thoughts, comments? No actually no comments questions.

Unknown Speaker  22:24  
In a diversity setting where

Unknown Speaker  22:25  
people write dissertations, we do it on their fucking dissertation.

Unknown Speaker  22:35  
Committee members.

Unknown Speaker  22:51  
Everyone's here. I

Unknown Speaker  22:57  
think so much girl that I wanted to live. A question that was asked earlier in the day. And if they're still around, they should set up this is their question that they're asking you and catering amount of Taylor about the nonprofit industrial complex and the role of nonprofits in this work. And so just curious if you could comment on what makes you worried about nonprofits who are involved in mass incarceration or prison I was working but encourages you about their problems.

Unknown Speaker  23:23  
Thank you. Can we have more like three questions and at a time?

Unknown Speaker  23:32  
You're welcome.

Unknown Speaker  23:38  
The body cams and the interrogation. Like, are you aware of like, in Chicago, he had the john birch issues and we like it. 7% of the drug convictions came out we have drops of cases where cases where police say we've dropped something, and I'm aware that those numbers are the strong dances. Somebody's careless or or justifiable be a lot of people will be here free into police abuse happened to temptations now as a result of those London thing that ultimately could have

Unknown Speaker  24:15  
a negative effect.

Unknown Speaker  24:23  
Man I took your question as an assignment when you ask what, what other questions can we ask aside from what's an alternative to prison? I think that in the question we should send to the people, not the person. So I said the question, what alternative systems can we build support for those who transfer trauma? I was

Unknown Speaker  24:52  
wondering in terms of the terrain to anticipate the future I noticing this shift from we won't go to

Unknown Speaker  24:57  
jail elemental health facility.

Unknown Speaker  25:00  
Police officers with delta will have treating mental health professionals

Unknown Speaker  25:02  
and give them on policing surveillance.

Unknown Speaker  25:05  
So I'm wondering what would an abolitionist approach look towards mental health services?

Unknown Speaker  25:14  
All right, thank you, everybody. Great questions. Great questions. I wanted to talk a little bit about the nonprofit industrial complex, and

Unknown Speaker  25:23  
especially big data, and the person who taught me to use those words not for profit, industrial complex as last question, and Sandy Smith is sitting here in the front row. And she's the person who organized me into the conference. The revolution will not be funded that became the book The revolution will not be funded. It was edited by insight. Smith. So here's what I want to say. The social justice sector broadly conceived. Plus the foundation sector, NASA browser to see is extremely dynamic. These days, that's the first thing. Second thing is those that have been on tend to stay big and get bigger. And this includes Fiera. Even though there's good work doing being done at pyrrha, there's a lot of other work being done appearance not so great. The great work is that in our backyards, project and jack Norton's here so he can talk to you about afterward. And big data is one of the ways that some of these big, really, really big powerful organizations intend to stay dominant in a situation where there is a connection, what we would say my fancy language and articulation between and among the not for profit, knowledge producers who say that they can continue to produce the most reliable data, the people who run the various institutions of the state, whether it be or the kinds of institutions that are really care for, like public education, I teach at the City University of New York 500,000 or prisons or all the things in between. and then the sources of money which comes either from the state or from the private allocation of stolen social wages, and that is from foundations.

Unknown Speaker  27:21  
That's our money that they keep, and then they decide how to spend it instead of us deciding.

Unknown Speaker  27:30  
So that combination has made certain players very, very powerful in that they get and centralize a lot of data and also do a lot of work determining policies using their data that then

Unknown Speaker  27:48  
enables them to be grant to smaller organizations, the actual carrying

Unknown Speaker  27:54  
out of certain kinds of

Unknown Speaker  27:56  
activity, those activities themselves and next, not zero

Unknown Speaker  27:59  
bad ones,

Unknown Speaker  28:01  
but they are keeping the system aggrandized. All that said, there are also

Unknown Speaker  28:07  
all kinds of not for profits that are falling

Unknown Speaker  28:10  
there is doing their thing. They're making the money however they can to do

Unknown Speaker  28:14  
the work they're going to do critical resistance

Unknown Speaker  28:16  
is one of them. So it's not the fact of being a not for profit. It's rather the the relationship that the institution has to the institutions of racial capitalism as it is destroying.

Unknown Speaker  28:32  
That is what I wanted to say about industrial complex. Oh, just add one little bit onto that. And that is in the living in the cornfields in Urbana, who the you know, the powers that Ruth is talking about, basically means that we don't get money, right, that most of the money is going to go to into big Metropolitan projects into big Metropolitan high profile, nonprofits and so forth and not much of it is dribbled down into into small communities. So I mean, that's that's just a reality. So we I'm young, I also work in an organization called first of all was was an organization for incarcerated people who are nonprofit that we have to scrape them. And we, we get money from the east Illinois Community Foundation, they give us $2,000 every year will be. So it's like, so is it a little bit of a different world for people who aren't in those big in those big centers, trying to fight trying to fight for trying to fight for funding? I don't envy being as big sit in the feeding frenzy of the big cities trying to get funding but number such as another car that we'll

Unknown Speaker  29:41  
be? I'll speak to the question about birds. Yes, I know where

Unknown Speaker  29:46  
I am.

Unknown Speaker  29:48  
And I want to say three things first, that

Unknown Speaker  29:53  
there's a conflation, that that's happening around the body, hands versus building interrogations versus cop watching birth, they're not all the same thing. the locus of control is very different. I'm pro cop watching, I used to do cop watching trainings. But then the cameras in the hands of people turned on to the system and the state. Yeah. And the control of that footage is in the hands of people, not the state. So I need you to think about what the locus of control is. And that matters quite a bit about what we mean by not by in terms of filming. I think the second thing I want to say is the question about like, data I like, the data is looking at one thing, and I'm not even sure what that thing is. But the data isn't looking at all the people who are now caught in the system because

Unknown Speaker  30:39  
of those very safe surveillance tools being turned against

Unknown Speaker  30:41  
them. So I might you know, what that is,

Unknown Speaker  30:43  
is one thing much broader than the other much

Unknown Speaker  30:45  
bigger than the other that would inform my decision making about what I think is effective and useful. And the last thing I would say is, I always want to be concerned about giving more tools to the state and surveillance. I think it's back I think that's true across the board. And so my answer to the question is no, I'm not going to see that as positive. Because I think I've looked at all the different ways through which we control the situation. Yes, you know, one person going free because somebody can show but there

Unknown Speaker  31:18  
are millions of other people not going

Unknown Speaker  31:20  
free, and actually been ensnared into the system as a result of that very same technology. So we just have to kind of evaluate those things over time. And I'd love to talk more if you're interested in those things around virgin organizing around that stuff, too. But thank you for the question. It's a good one. Yeah. And then Andy's question, which we didn't answer because I don't know what the fuck I don't know.

Unknown Speaker  31:43  
If that's what this this hope is, is it migrates constantly, and adopts and then tries to take

Unknown Speaker  31:48  
on our very words and turns them against us.

Unknown Speaker  31:51  
You know, that and i think i every opportunity that we have where folks don't actually get to, you know, Where the state doesn't take control? So it's like, why are they the ones this? And I think Elizabeth Hinton, in her book does a really good job of laying out like LA, and the way that law enforcement started doing social services, like offering grants there that disseminator of the grant. So we have to go to the police to get grants for mental health care, like why are they the locus of control for everything? Why can't that be the community's money, which it is that's been granted to the community and the community is not monolithic? The communities backed up and oppressive, too. So I'm not trying to romanticize that because there's other things we have to do to constantly be changing our consciousness of the community level, but I'd rather a bunch of community members do something than the fact that state so

Unknown Speaker  32:51  
I can't help it. So people who are like tender, whatever, you know, it's hard doing this work person must be live and that

Unknown Speaker  33:11  
We really want everybody to go to tweet message me so we don't want to keep everybody but Jeremy Ross minute you want to share

Unknown Speaker  33:23  
evolution now green bag international and I had all

Unknown Speaker  33:29  
said about internationalism so just keep that in your heart

Unknown Speaker  33:34  
Thank you

Unknown Speaker  33:42  
so there was a my job which is power going to reduce arms

Unknown Speaker  33:47  
a my job.

Unknown Speaker  33:53  
I'm just going to end by saying this a list of resources because I'm a resource person. There are organizations that Here including James's organization, first

Unknown Speaker  34:02  
dollars, that is doing really good work in Urbana that is focused on reentry work. And it's my belief that money doesn't solve everything, but without it, you can't do much. So that means like, give money to these groups and organizations. Many of them are nonprofits, but then some are not on the list. So this is not a non profit, but we do have a fiscal sponsor that is right. Like we have to figure out ways to do work. So what I'm saying is, give us your money. Give us your money. Thank you so much.

Transcribed by https://otter.ai
