Unknown Speaker  0:20  
Listen

Unknown Speaker  0:22  
to each other

Unknown Speaker  1:38  
The company it was with

Unknown Speaker  1:46  
me

Unknown Speaker  1:54  
the wakers This is totally

Unknown Speaker  1:58  
it

Unknown Speaker  2:00  
This

Unknown Speaker  2:05  
is like

Unknown Speaker  2:19  
you

Unknown Speaker  2:24  
need

Unknown Speaker  2:29  
to be

Unknown Speaker  2:32  
to try

Unknown Speaker  2:42  
bye

Unknown Speaker  3:01  
Live Without this

Unknown Speaker  3:05  
is

Unknown Speaker  3:08  
a much

Unknown Speaker  3:13  
smaller students of the seniors entertainment

Unknown Speaker  3:39  
one that we

Unknown Speaker  3:42  
become the

Unknown Speaker  3:46  
one that opens up the university professors

Unknown Speaker  3:51  
coming for the teaching that is coming to

Unknown Speaker  3:55  
Canada. What

Unknown Speaker  3:58  
company do you

Unknown Speaker  4:01  
14 companies for you

Unknown Speaker  4:03  
to see on the process.

Unknown Speaker  4:07  
Once you stop watching gross, you don't come

Unknown Speaker  4:13  
out to be a man or you come back to me.

Unknown Speaker  4:21  
Tina

Unknown Speaker  4:27  
Turner

Unknown Speaker  4:40  
could be a mom.

Unknown Speaker  4:43  
I see it

Unknown Speaker  4:49  
as a motivation, but now I want to be free

Unknown Speaker  4:55  
20 years ago

Unknown Speaker  5:00  
My life

Unknown Speaker  5:03  
like it's like I will just

Unknown Speaker  5:08  
say

Unknown Speaker  5:13  
I'm going to someone.

Unknown Speaker  5:17  
How many

Unknown Speaker  5:19  
people you for

Unknown Speaker  5:22  
making generously

Unknown Speaker  5:24  
doesn't sum it up with what you might not think twice about.

Unknown Speaker  5:32  
Just today

Unknown Speaker  5:35  
we celebrate

Unknown Speaker  5:43  
your hand.

Unknown Speaker  5:51  
Please

Unknown Speaker  5:54  
understand that

Unknown Speaker  5:57  
the

Unknown Speaker  5:59  
people who win

Unknown Speaker  6:00  
Faith and

Unknown Speaker  6:05  
vision

Unknown Speaker  6:21  
Don't

Unknown Speaker  6:24  
be creepy.

Unknown Speaker  6:40  
Edison, straight off the air power

Unknown Speaker  6:47  
was wrong

Unknown Speaker  7:00  
really

Unknown Speaker  7:02  
disrespectful behavior to

Unknown Speaker  7:12  
the

Unknown Speaker  7:18  
management team be

Unknown Speaker  7:22  
a baby and again know people are

Unknown Speaker  7:26  
important with recommendable

Unknown Speaker  7:38  
need to change

Unknown Speaker  7:50  
and

Unknown Speaker  7:53  
what we know is like if we can do

Unknown Speaker  7:58  
it

Unknown Speaker  8:06  
Sister deployed in the

Unknown Speaker  8:09  
black

Unknown Speaker  8:14  
ops law

Unknown Speaker  8:17  
and that's what happened. Now.

Unknown Speaker  8:26  
This is all basically

Unknown Speaker  8:37  
just

Unknown Speaker  8:41  
has to be spoken

Unknown Speaker  8:43  
for

Unknown Speaker  8:47  
a while hi

Unknown Speaker  8:54  
Justin

Unknown Speaker  8:59  
okay guys

Unknown Speaker  9:00  
Like

Unknown Speaker  9:05  
a

Unknown Speaker  9:07  
condition

Unknown Speaker  9:10  
in our lifestyle on the life of other people

Unknown Speaker  9:15  
that

Unknown Speaker  9:18  
this will be an opportunity to

Unknown Speaker  9:23  
have people using leveraging as a person, I see me they also move

Unknown Speaker  9:34  
over here, lazy like

Unknown Speaker  9:37  
it any type of outcome

Unknown Speaker  9:41  
is made from

Unknown Speaker  9:44  
baby job to soccer ball and won't be too long the state's activity manager my servicer down the road

Unknown Speaker  9:55  
initiative then the inside

Unknown Speaker  10:03  
Is that because actually most of our population is just their their comfort then

Unknown Speaker  10:12  
I mean all of our day to day operations but the message from the Warriors captain's lieutenants commentary on windows that wonderful black Captain

Unknown Speaker  10:26  
Captain station may seem like

Unknown Speaker  10:32  
it's a mess

Unknown Speaker  10:38  
and they know what to do during the spring space. It takes me like a

Unknown Speaker  10:45  
continuing story after

Unknown Speaker  10:48  
the job of absolute

Unknown Speaker  10:52  
prison.

Unknown Speaker  10:55  
Exactly. Got the right guy to come in. Right

Unknown Speaker  11:00  
DC Main

Unknown Speaker  11:03  
Street open up the ladder in the same town. You are not afraid to move on or there is your hand behind.

Unknown Speaker  11:13  
You can be

Unknown Speaker  11:18  
like

Unknown Speaker  11:20  
how will they be the family to

Unknown Speaker  11:23  
go?

Unknown Speaker  11:25  
To be so we will

Unknown Speaker  11:30  
literally change who we spoke to

Unknown Speaker  11:36  
look at the picture. We are still at 330

Unknown Speaker  11:50  
on the

Unknown Speaker  11:53  
Tuesday night

Unknown Speaker  11:55  
2030 leads

Unknown Speaker  11:58  
receive

Unknown Speaker  12:00  
Get a feel for it. I understand it is tough to

Unknown Speaker  12:04  
be want to leave

Unknown Speaker  12:08  
your sleep by she's

Unknown Speaker  12:10  
been a tough to put a good home on it

Unknown Speaker  12:16  
like this is the one

Unknown Speaker  12:22  
is bad this this is

Unknown Speaker  12:25  
this is me all you

Unknown Speaker  12:30  
need

Unknown Speaker  12:34  
to come to this

Unknown Speaker  12:36  
conference for

Unknown Speaker  12:40  
yup top of the microphone from this young guy. This

Unknown Speaker  12:44  
is no good way

Unknown Speaker  12:47  
to break out

Unknown Speaker  12:50  
people challenge to the visa telson

Unknown Speaker  12:57  
others so we came Thank you

Unknown Speaker  13:00  
123

Unknown Speaker  13:05  
I will just come in and say hi and tell me this is just your your face

Unknown Speaker  13:10  
or talk to the DA

Unknown Speaker  13:12  
like this face I was so nervous covered.

Unknown Speaker  13:17  
It's I just couldn't really do heels of the art

Unknown Speaker  13:21  
museum.

Unknown Speaker  13:26  
I hope that

Unknown Speaker  13:30  
you

Unknown Speaker  13:35  
have watched it which found

Unknown Speaker  13:39  
each month

Unknown Speaker  13:43  
now

Unknown Speaker  13:46  
in America time,

Unknown Speaker  13:49  
every minute but

Unknown Speaker  13:51  
we are

Unknown Speaker  13:58  
go for my

Unknown Speaker  14:13  
You're watching

Unknown Speaker  14:24  
easy

Unknown Speaker  14:45  
is going on

Unknown Speaker  14:49  
but he

Unknown Speaker  14:55  
okay

Unknown Speaker  15:18  
You're my messenger, right?

Unknown Speaker  15:22  
Yeah.

Unknown Speaker  15:45  
Okay, sorry to bring you up after that. I just want to give Anton, the opportunity to talk we've been writing for about a year now and just the stuff that's happening in Alabama. prisons is unconscionable. So if you can look into what's happening at homeland

Unknown Speaker  16:01  
Right there elected officials across Alabama. It's just absolutely corruption and violence of the world. So

Unknown Speaker  16:09  
I'd like to welcome up our lot and abolition panel. Thank you.

Unknown Speaker  17:03  
Good morning, everybody. We're excited to continue this fantastic conference of this morning, for the panel on the topic of the law and the abolition of the internet was sharing with us. I mean, it shows you how broken these institutions, we have our and we have a fantastic panel of illustrious guests this morning who are going to help us unpack this. And the idea, I think, is to have a bit of a free flowing conversation. What we're gonna do is I'll introduce them, and then each of them will talk for about five minutes or so about their experiences and their thoughts about where we are, where we should be headed. And then we're going to have a broader conversation about these kinds of topics, and then give you all a chance as well as some questions. So let me introduce everybody. First, and then we'll move forward. So first, we have Amanda Alexander, who's the founder and executive director of the Detroit Justice Center.

Unknown Speaker  18:00  
Just a new blood lawyer, an organization that works alongside communities to create economic opportunities, transform the justice system and promote equitable and just cities. Originally from Michigan, Dr. Alexander's work with the intersection of racial justice, social movements and community development in Detroit, York and South Africa for over 15 years. She's an Echoing Green fellow source justice fellow Fulbright scholar and the 2018 law for black clouds legal innovator fellow. Dr. Alex is a senior research scholar at the University of Michigan law school, and serves on the board of the Center for Constitutional Rights of the James and Grace Lee Boggs center to nurture community leadership. She holds a JD from Yale Law School, a PhD in history from Columbia University, and a BA from Harvard College. Next to my right is reginal. Joining that is a poet and a memoirist is the author of three books. The reason

Unknown Speaker  19:00  
Published bastards of the Reagan era, the 2010 nc n double acp Image Award winning no more a question of freedom and the poetry collection should be agreed to.

Unknown Speaker  19:14  
Join is currently enrolled in a PhD in law currently in law school. He's earned the JD from the Yale Law School and MFA from the Warren Wilson college, his MFA program for writers and a BA from the University of Maryland. Next we have Elizabeth him all the way down the end, who's a john our Associate Professor of Social Sciences and departments of history and African and African American Studies at Harvard University. In her book, from the war on poverty to the war on crime, the making a mass incarceration America, Hinton examines implementation of federal law enforcement programs beginning in the mid 1960s. That made the United States the largest prison system in world history. This work received numerous awards and recognition

Unknown Speaker  20:00  
Including the Ralph Waldo Emerson prize from the five day Catholic society and being named York Times 100. The rule books of 2016 hemans op eds on massive mass criminalization, surveillance and the persistence of racial inequality can be found on the pages of the New York Times The Atlantic, the la times the boss interview the nation and time. And last but certainly not least, we have Derek De Pere now is a human rights lawyer and writer based in Washington DC. She provides legal support organizing trainings and indicates resources store owners across the country to build campaigns against state violence. She's written for the New York Times The Guardian, and the Boston review for now is currently Deputy Director of the Spirit Justice Center at Union Theological Seminary. Let's welcome our guests with their own boss.

Unknown Speaker  20:57  
So what we'll do now is just going to go down the line

Unknown Speaker  21:00  
Few of which you share for five minutes or so your thoughts about this and you're on the front lines of these issues are lots of different ways of reading, writing and advocating in the public sphere about this. And so after we do that we can have a conversation.

Unknown Speaker  21:17  
Right? Let's start out with the other than

Unknown Speaker  21:21  
your first. Thanks. Thank you so much for that introduction and documentary. I'd also like to thank Garrett Barber, once again for organizing this.

Unknown Speaker  21:32  
Yeah, I've been a friend of mine for years, he go back to graduate school together when we were working on the Malcolm X project form a miracle and I would be remiss if I didn't invoke commanding right now because I know that he is so proud of you, and has just gone in such a influence in both of our work. So thank you, and thank you Manny.

Unknown Speaker  21:56  
So I this

Unknown Speaker  22:00  
conference has been incredible and i i processing everything and trying to think about what abolition means and where we can go from here. I

Unknown Speaker  22:14  
as part of this is another shameless plug.

Unknown Speaker  22:18  
Recently, I curated an exhibit and Homeland conference on the life and legacy of Angela Davis. Davis recently

Unknown Speaker  22:30  
has left her archive with Harvard University's Radcliffe Institute. And I think for those of you at this conference, this archive presents a really compelling history of the abolitionist movement in the late 20th century us from the free Angela Davis committee to the National Alliance Against Racism, political oppression to the anti apartheid movement and of course, political resistance. If you can't make it out to Harvard to you the archive the Angela Davis radical

Unknown Speaker  23:00  
commitments conference is now available on YouTube. So I encourage you to download some of the sessions, maybe on the plane home to watch to continue thinking about many of these issues.

Unknown Speaker  23:13  
So as part of that conference, we formed a what we decided to call the pathways collective, which is a gathering of feminist scholars who meet inside a state prison for women. And I can't say where of course because our incarcerated members would potentially face repression from prison authorities, but we were there. The last time we were there was in

Unknown Speaker  23:38  
September, and also Harvey, who's here is also a member of that group. And we had worked with many of the the archival materials from the collection at Radcliffe and had read a number of years led Davis's work and other work by feminist abolitionists, including with the Gilmore Girls here.

Unknown Speaker  23:58  
And we were talking about

Unknown Speaker  24:00  
What abolition means. And one of the women in the group was talking about view about religion as communities of care. Thinking about an abolitionist practice that is really based on care for one another. Practicing abolition, even amongst groups of people who are incarcerated by fostering communities appeared inside the prison as an active resistance and active advancing abolition, and of course, the communities of care that we can create on the other side of that, in order to help advance and realize what abolition might be what what the kind of society that would support abolition would look like. So that concept in recent months has really kind of stuck with me as a way of thinking about society that we're trying to build, and what the communities that we're going to need to create in order to realize that society will look like and

Unknown Speaker  24:58  
kind of the

Unknown Speaker  25:00  
kindness of what that society might be on the other side, one that doesn't, as the next one said,

Unknown Speaker  25:07  
live a creative lifestyle on the lives of others, right one that doesn't use kind of even caging as a way to solve needs and social problems. And in order to get there I think that that that idea of communities of care is something that we can help foster and I think something that

Unknown Speaker  25:27  
people incarcerated people are fostering

Unknown Speaker  25:30  
as a way to to survive.

Unknown Speaker  25:37  
Thank you also to carry inviting me to what feels like the Grammys with

Unknown Speaker  25:45  
no words though, which is Latin phrase and then secondly, I am terribly nervous, but I'm rubbing my hands because Dwayne The biggest lotion I have ever had in my life. So this is my music have on my finger.

Unknown Speaker  26:00  
prints on it. Probably my hand I'm listening. But it's because I can't give it to

Unknown Speaker  26:10  
another tons of students here. And so

Unknown Speaker  26:15  
I just want to talk to students.

Unknown Speaker  26:18  
So raise your hand.

Unknown Speaker  26:22  
Okay.

Unknown Speaker  26:24  
So one, do not go to law school to become a cop.

Unknown Speaker  26:36  
Which doesn't mean that once you graduate law school and go to the community, you guys are working on a campaign that you ultimately may make that decision in response to to the people you're working with. But, you know, I graduated law school five minutes ago. And what has happened since then is that there's been a phrase for progressive prosecutors which activities

Unknown Speaker  26:58  
and so what happens to my little boss

Unknown Speaker  27:00  
There are people somehow as a word like a blessing maybe of wanting to become a progressive prosecutor because they've been so inspired by election fest this country and they want to know is like, that's the right path. And I always say absolutely not like don't make that like your dream of what you're going to do.

Unknown Speaker  27:21  
So please have a cup of coffee. You can be a cop for much less dead men last

Unknown Speaker  27:30  
want to say about last rule is that it is incredibly important to study as well as work.

Unknown Speaker  27:38  
I don't just mean working for diversity and inclusion offers

Unknown Speaker  27:43  
me out petitions who are racist, you can have a regular university with the diversity inclusion office yet so don't don't do that. Instead, I really, really hope you take out the hospital organized living for people who are the most

Unknown Speaker  28:01  
After three years, you're probably never going to talk to

Unknown Speaker  28:04  
your workers, Diamond workers

Unknown Speaker  28:09  
who don't get the same sort of benefits and opportunities as

Unknown Speaker  28:13  
you know, when I was at Harvard Law School, we were very excited because we wanted brace professors and and members of the opposite

Unknown Speaker  28:22  
track the middle of the South Africa.

Unknown Speaker  28:26  
There.

Unknown Speaker  28:28  
They will work against attraction labor, so that the janitors will be able to get tuition discounts and healthcare from university. And I was like, Oh, this is working. This is happening. So

Unknown Speaker  28:43  
fortunately, there was a student movement that was supporting the 90 and janitorial workers and they want they want students to have a career

Unknown Speaker  28:54  
ultimately decided that that's what do I support my mind? So please ask for you.

Unknown Speaker  29:00  
decided to work and do all your putting your resume, please, please, please organize people who are smarter than you.

Unknown Speaker  29:08  
And then finally, once you graduate and become a lawyer, don't think of the lawyer profession as a culmination of work and working as a shift because I read so many personal statements was just like, you know, I was an organizer. And now I want to make real change as a lawyer, as a real lawyer and you cannot make real change that like you cannot. One thing that you can do better than a lot of people is help get people out of jail and use the law to eliminate temporarily suffering for people which is important.

Unknown Speaker  29:44  
And you do that because you've been trained three years of being stupid, they call them and they pay money every month to the bar that gives you permission to practice and set up intention to keep up as well. So what you can do is help people

Unknown Speaker  30:00  
Figure out how to get people out of jail. This is very, very important.

Unknown Speaker  30:05  
But

Unknown Speaker  30:07  
he said something that very striking,

Unknown Speaker  30:11  
which is the way that they treat us and he was unconstitutional was problematic. You know, I'm sure he's probably cruel and unusual, which is, I think that I believe that is completely constitutional attack.

Unknown Speaker  30:25  
And that's the cost of doing prisons, that when people decide that people should go away to live in the case and be subjected to treatment, what they're saying is that that's the cost. This is what you deserve to be convicted.

Unknown Speaker  30:39  
And what we need instead of just going as lawyers is for people to become traders of the law, we need lawyers who are not just aggressive, we need people who are willing to retrain the power of the Constitution. That's the analysis that we need. So as you actually have to surround yourself, organizers with movement lawyers and with institutions

Unknown Speaker  31:00  
People see the teacher

Unknown Speaker  31:03  
say to do the work, or all the time to undermine the power of it, because we have too much competition.

Unknown Speaker  31:19  
So good morning, everyone.

Unknown Speaker  31:21  
I'm really glad to follow Derek.

Unknown Speaker  31:24  
I everything you said, totally unplanned. I will talk a bit about what we're doing at the Detroit Justice Center. So we are a movement lawyer and shop we opened about 18 months ago. And I came up as an organizer. So I had the

Unknown Speaker  31:43  
fortunate to be trained by act up New York and Philadelphia organizers.

Unknown Speaker  31:50  
And so they taught me everything I know about power, about how to change the fact that comes about because people are organizing for their freedom.

Unknown Speaker  32:00  
And I was a very reluctant lawyer. So I went to law school and my late 20s. I did not, did not think much of lawyers and they told the energy radical movements. And they're always the ones when the organizers have brilliant ideas to take to the streets. And the challenge power. It was the lawyers were saying, But wait, do you have a permit for that March? And don't you know that this will get you locked up?

Unknown Speaker  32:22  
And so I haven't been to law school. And that's a longer story. And I think if you decide to do that, keep in mind everything that Derek has said. But I went to law school. And then after law school, about six years ago, I moved home to Michigan, and had moved to serve families who've been divided by incarceration like mine. So that's representing incarcerated parents running something called the president of the Justice Project at Michigan law school. And this is 2013. So Detroit was about to file the largest ever municipal bankruptcy. And there was all this talk about the future of the city at that time and people were talking about

Unknown Speaker  33:00  
resurgence and Renaissance and all these nice timing followers, that effectively meant that the clients that I was serving would be completely shut out for the conversation with the city. And as a historian, it occurred to me that people couldn't seem to decide if Detroit was 50 years ahead, or 50 years behind the rest of the country. They're all of these new york times pieces about is the rest of the country don't go away. Detroit did or isn't that Detroit never matured beyond the 50s and 60s. And so it was, of course of learning from organizers and doing deep listening the course of several years, it became very clear to me that Detroit is 50 years ahead, in terms of all of the visionary organizing, that folks have had to develop out of necessity. So, you know, I talked to people who understand the bottoming out of American capitalism, and it's that wisdom, I think that puts us ahead of many other places. So I have neighbors who would talk about you know, the good old days when you put

Unknown Speaker  34:00  
get fired from Ford and walk across the street and get an even better job of GM. And now they can also talk about losing their home to tax foreclosure, having their water shut off, getting swept up in the criminal legal system. And because of what happened in Detroit, and because of the presence of incredibly visionary organizers and philosophers like James Bond,

Unknown Speaker  34:23  
made it clear over the course of many decades, it was important not just to talk about what we are tearing down, or what we're fighting against, but that we have to also be focused on vision and imagination, what we're fighting for. You feel the imprint of Grace Lee Boggs and Jimmy Boggs all over the world as a culture of the city and

Unknown Speaker  34:45  
doing it visionary organizers doing things like you know, when grocery stores left, and people didn't want to leave their home, they had to figure out how to feed themselves. And so they taught themselves how to farm and we are waiting

Unknown Speaker  35:00  
hadn't occurred in terms of urban agriculture, and building a resilient local food system that can feed itself and also give share seeds. And it's all sorts of lessons for other cities. We are way ahead of the curve in terms of the fight for water just coming to all of your cities. And so I think in this country or around the world, if we have access to water, as that is clean and accessible and humid, right, it would be because of one of my players Sharif and planets. Women like Monica was Patrick in Detroit, who are fighting for that now, Detroit. So the idea was to help the lawyers be useful

Unknown Speaker  35:41  
for all of these visionary organizers, and what I've ended on with other lawyers in the city was a model called defense, offense and dreaming, because I think we need all three under one roof. And so the US is three pronged approach. The first piece is the defense of peace. So I think as well

Unknown Speaker  36:00  
Yours is Derek said, we are able to alleviate suffering. You know, we have certain tools that can make life a bit better for folks. And so the defensive piece we know to help resolve Lawrence find these tickets, all these things that keep people shut out of the future of the city. So our clients come to us with 14 warrants across six different courts, because they dared to drive outside of Detroit to work. They couldn't pay off track of clients and the last time that they were pulled over. We, you know, work with people who are coming out of prison to resolve things like the $70,000 in child support that that approval they are consolidating, because they didn't tell the paperwork, click the front of the court know that they were unknown, frustrated. So these are concrete things that I think can actually alleviate some suffering. And then we go on offense with our economic equity practice. And so that's where we have transactional attorneys who board away from law firms, development clinics.

Unknown Speaker  37:00  
To put this transactional training on to use for communities that are coming up with community land trust, and worker cooperatives, and creative approaches to affordable housing. So you know, what I say is that we hold our clients freedom dreams as sacred. And I see the role of economic equity practices, helping to translate our clients freedom dreams into reality. So what that means is, we have a client who's on the west side of Detroit, is a community organization that quietly bought up 14 homes around the community center. And they came to us because they want to figure out how can we keep this neighborhood affordable for generations to come? And they've heard about community land trust and wondered about this. And as my attorneys were talking to them came out was that you know, we also want to turn one of these homes into transitional housing, for mentoring back in prison. And we want to put community solar over the whole neighborhood. And what a small business portmore and oh, yeah, we're a Muslim organization. So all of a sudden

Unknown Speaker  38:00  
Have to import with Sharia law,

Unknown Speaker  38:02  
which is a beautiful puzzle for my attorneys. You know, this is a freedom dream where this community has combined the solution for re entry, transitional housing, climate justice, neighborhood affordability, and it's better than anything that you know, think tank or someone could have thought up. And so it's our role as lawyers to really listen deeply and figure out how to do exactly what they're telling us to do. The last piece is our justice lapses where we dream and we invite people to dream with us them actually concretely pilot, some of these things that I hope to be abolitionists presence that we are deeply indebted to the to really feel more to Angela Davis tomorrow because there's so many other people who have honed our thinking and given us new tools to ask better questions. But what I will she must need is not just an absence but a presence. And so I the ask people be

Unknown Speaker  38:54  
asked what do we be building? How can we spend this half a billion dollars that Detroit and Wayne County are intending

Unknown Speaker  39:00  
Spending a new jail? How can we spend that in order to have you feel safe and valued and empowered in your community? So we have the design workshop last fall where we asked Detroit young people, how can we spend this money. And over the course of the day, we pair them with architects and designers who are helping them actually design what these buildings would look like. And they came up with all sorts of ideas, and not one of them said that we need to spend another dime on jails or police.

Unknown Speaker  39:27  
And instead, they said things like, let's build a mental health spa.

Unknown Speaker  39:31  
So this was a 13 year old girl, to describe the place where you could go, where you could talk through whatever was making you anxious. That individual therapy on the first floor and group conversations on the second floor and up on the roof. You can look out at the Detroit River because that's something that suits their spirit. And they designed the down to what would be most soothing paint colors on the wall. people to just show up and get cared for

Unknown Speaker  40:00  
Deal with some underlying.

Unknown Speaker  40:02  
They had all sorts of ideas that build more affordable housing.

Unknown Speaker  40:07  
You know, they said, pay our teachers, fix the water pipes in our school, and have any other kind of freedom dreams that we have a short video that I can play later on. And we'll get to that. But then we're also trying to pilot some of these things. And so one of our clients is trite life is valuable every day. This is a hospital based violence prevention program. That was started by Dr. position, Dr. tosha, new, he realized that he was catching up young black men after gun violence and sending them back out to the same situation that they're coming from. So he thought what would it take to really interrupt this cycle of violence, incarceration, and trauma, and what would it need to really wrap around and hold these young people and so they created a program where you know, folks are either get

Unknown Speaker  40:57  
peer support, behavioral health counseling,

Unknown Speaker  41:00  
All sorts of, you know, support around the underlying trauma that led to this incident. And also the trauma just growing up in the neighborhoods that they're growing up in. They, you know, get support around education, their own jobs, all sorts of things. So there's really wrapped around those folks. And they have not had a single person be with injured. And before people were coming back with a three or four months being really injured by gun violence, and so as their 20s, you know, we already know the legal barriers that these young people have. So we had a client was woken up handcuffed to his hospital bed, not because he was charged with anything related to this incident, but because he had outstanding track record.

Unknown Speaker  41:37  
And so, you know, beyond just removing these legal barriers, we started to listen to our clients and realized that many of them had no place to go with their destruction of hospital. So hopefully by the end of next year will be opening up supportive housing for these young people. We're looking at healing space, you know, where they can go for up to eight months, and just focus on their feeling and not worry about it.

Unknown Speaker  42:00  
You're hustling underground economy and the rents are going back to the apartment complex where they are shot and PTSD triggered. So this is the type of thing that I think when we talk about centering the needs of survivors, or crime victims, this is what we need to be talking about. And this is we need to be centering. So these are the types of solutions that we hope to grow out of the vision and work with a company in Detroit, and could inspire work in other places. And I really see this as communities having an answer for as we divest from jails and prisons and police for this opportunity to reinvest in other things. Much of the problem with justice reinvestment so far is that the cops and the wardens always have an answer for how they will follow that money back. They will say, Okay, well become social workers now, or will become a reentry service provider. And instead, it's a communities have the answers. They don't know we're going to build support housing, we're going to take care of our people. And so that's sort of the longer term play in terms of really thinking about you know how to have this big

Unknown Speaker  43:00  
public investment in these types of things. So really excited to be talking about

Unknown Speaker  43:16  
this a pleasure to be here.

Unknown Speaker  43:19  
These three are quite distinguished and improvisational at first feel much less uncomfortable following it.

Unknown Speaker  43:28  
I don't know. I think it's I mean, for me, like more abolition of even estates, actually say,

Unknown Speaker  43:35  
you know, I was in some spaces yesterday and I thought about it. And actually platform so America agent, and she was like going to the panel. It's like, Nah, take some time. Let me say by myself making lunch, read a book. I'm not going to go into a room filled with people talking about incarceration. Good.

Unknown Speaker  43:56  
And I was thinking I didn't know why I was feeling that way. And so

Unknown Speaker  44:00  
A few hours later, what I want to draw a quote.

Unknown Speaker  44:04  
And you know, we understand this as a black problem and many facts in the space as I enter the top when it comes to region as a black problem. And I want to sit Israel cool. And I like to tell people is more white people locked up and black folks because you know, when you say it's a black belt, and you get to say this down.

Unknown Speaker  44:21  
So I've gone to the drug court, and it's filled with white folks. And I was like, This is what I'm talking about, you know, it's not just something that people in our community struggle with.

Unknown Speaker  44:31  
And anyway, it was it was interesting, because I'm thinking about how we were just introduced, and it was with all about accolades. I think everybody on the stage is associated with some Ivy League institution. Some of them is associated with multiple institutions

Unknown Speaker  44:48  
in different countries, right. And, and I was thinking about what the judge did yesterday, when he introduced he said, I have a friend in payment, who's a Harvard Graduate

Unknown Speaker  45:00  
I had a house guest who's a friend of that friend. And he went to Yale Law School. He's a public defender. He worked full body as a public defender. He's a writer. He's written four books and and

Unknown Speaker  45:13  
he now makes the year last one of the best law school in the country and he works on criminal justice reform. And the people in the audience you know, who their own addiction, who've been dealing with incarceration, who've been suffering was like the fuck is this to come in and talk to somebody we think we might, but you can see in their faces, the ship was visible. And the judge told me that he was going through the rope and don't saw already knows I was really worried about it.

Unknown Speaker  45:40  
And when I went up to talk and you know, they bring in a lottery back to Mississippi and so the first thing I said was

Unknown Speaker  45:47  
not play the lottery once with a pistol in the bag. We not put the pitch to somebody who stayed in contact. And me my friend, my co defendant was 15 minutes how many everybody in the audience was like waiting system

Unknown Speaker  46:00  
Today with the Moscow one after this game over again, as a matter of break decision, right.

Unknown Speaker  46:06  
And I talked for

Unknown Speaker  46:10  
you know, I talked for about

Unknown Speaker  46:13  
1015 minutes.

Unknown Speaker  46:16  
And the thing that troubled me was I've recognized that I come to spaces. And I really talked to those folks that was in that moment. And my people, the people I've worked with, the people call me the phone. I got three calls in prison this morning. I got another call from a cousin who needed $20 because he want to go get a job and he needs a metro free even often three years still hasn't been even find a job. Like those are the folks that I know and I'm not saying that people in this room. don't notice a kinds of folks but I'm saying that I come in this room and particularly feel distant, particularly feel like traumatized every month, except routine cash.

Unknown Speaker  47:00  
And when people say like, you know, we'd like to lock people up in cages. I always feel like I grew up in a prison.

Unknown Speaker  47:08  
I grew up in a cage, I

Unknown Speaker  47:10  
always feel like I grew up in prisons, I grew up with men in prison, who my teachers, who my educators, who my friends, was sometimes the threats that were around me, I feel like we carve out the spaces in which we talk about ideas. Instead of really like grappling with people I left yesterday, I was in here, and somebody was saying that the first step back with some bullshit, just like this, another one of these rooms on the end,

Unknown Speaker  47:41  
because I remember when my man called me when he heard of the first bag, he had hope that he wasn't gonna die in prison.

Unknown Speaker  47:50  
And it's like nobody in his room is Jonathan Jackson.

Unknown Speaker  47:53  
But it is so easy to just like this ownership and my focus is going to try to help

Unknown Speaker  48:00  
People live.

Unknown Speaker  48:01  
And I don't know, maybe I will feel different if the people in a drug court or people in a prison as safe as the first step that

Unknown Speaker  48:12  
but it is he evolved when I had these kinds of criticisms, coming from rooms that deeply unintentionally feel like they only invite me in the space, because I got enough degrees to suggest that I'm more than a comment. And I ain't never been formally incarcerated. I like the word convict. I like the word felon, because it has the permanency of the shit that I deal with in the world. And so I guess the last week I've seen sounds like everybody talks about what they're doing, and I guess what I'm doing or what I try to do as I return to prison, yeah, I thought I was going to law school. I mean, with the law schools, I couldn't get a job. So I didn't really go to law school to be part of the movement. And in the last one to organize with a public defender. I went to law school so I can avoid paying myself

Unknown Speaker  49:00  
known

Unknown Speaker  49:01  
and required to do that is because all the progressive people who run the institutions that I will see them work from wouldn't happen.

Unknown Speaker  49:09  
So that's why I went to law school. But I thought,

Unknown Speaker  49:12  
what did I ultimately end up doing my law degree and basically, like that I'm doing is trying to get my friends out of prison.

Unknown Speaker  49:20  
And I appreciate it listening to my man from Alabama talk this morning because it made me realize that

Unknown Speaker  49:26  
I have sort of been working on intentionally finding ways to return to the spaces that we ignore. Because despite all of the advocacy that happens, you know, it's like 15 1600 prisons in the country.

Unknown Speaker  49:40  
And the average number of esteemed speakers that visit any prison, and I'm giving you is zero,

Unknown Speaker  49:52  
like zero,

Unknown Speaker  49:54  
you know, so it's like how can we have a movement that is supposed to be deeply in a

Unknown Speaker  50:00  
intentionally invested abolition, when the lights of the movement never returned institutions of the passage.

Unknown Speaker  50:10  
So what I try to do for my own my two cents

Unknown Speaker  50:15  
is go back. I'm always struggled when I go back. And I'm always bothered when I go back. But I go back, because I know that like in my movie, the happiest, nobody showed up.

Unknown Speaker  50:26  
And we have to show it all here. We have to show up in a legislator, we have to show up in the house. We have to be defense attorneys, we have to be a storage, we have to be all of those things. But I think the other thing that we have to be is actually there in a mass of people who are saying the word before, because quietus care. If I pull a pistol out and pointed at you, you will want me to go to prison. That's the one thing I learned when I worked for years of public defender that when black women got robbed by the young black kids, they wanted the maximum punishment.

Unknown Speaker  50:58  
And so it's like how do you support

Unknown Speaker  51:00  
Yeah, have you changed the conversation was to constantly put in a place where you confront it with the actual harms that have done, have been done to like force yourself to think about what can we do this better?

Unknown Speaker  51:22  
Well, there's so much showing pack here. And so I think you actually gave me an end till this idea, which is the consequence of these broken institutions that we have is the splintering of our society. And I think what a lot of people are talking about is, how do we build that community? How do we have communities of care? How do we make things the tution of law schools? How do we make the legal profession a place that helps build our society and not separate us? What is a feature city look like? What is the vision of this look like going forward? We have a community that is truly a community

Unknown Speaker  52:00  
said that community that's broken down by institutions that isolate separate, push people down, so on so forth. And so I didn't know what you all thought in terms of weighing on how does this work and practice on the ground? And what kinds of things can we be doing individually and collectively, to change the world that we live in and the brokenness that we see everywhere? I mean, he described it so well, this morning,

Unknown Speaker  52:32  
I think,

Unknown Speaker  52:33  
led me to describe, you know, what the JC is doing? I think, a response to that question. And just making a point. You know, we I imagine people who identify as abolitionists enter into communities all the time, who wants to know like, what do

Unknown Speaker  52:51  
you do about rape because what do you do about people who cause contrast

Unknown Speaker  52:56  
and even with someone like my mom

Unknown Speaker  53:00  
You know, that's a different record this morning when I tell her that, you know, the Lord is trying to, you know about pregnant beliefs. She's like, Yeah, but when he does like, like your real job, this is cool for right now. But when you actually become a lawyer, and you know, the amount we're doing to

Unknown Speaker  53:19  
people want folks to go to prison.

Unknown Speaker  53:24  
I would say maybe 100 years ago, or maybe 150 years ago, when people would get or part of, you know, the lead with a good sweat. A lot of times the response to that was amputation. Because what they were doing was seeking immediate relief for whatever.

Unknown Speaker  53:47  
And so since then, we've learned that there are other ways to cure parts of our bodies that hurt the outcome.

Unknown Speaker  53:55  
And presence for so long has been the response to curating what

Unknown Speaker  54:00  
ailing and but the problem with that is that it doesn't actually stop the problem. So I know plenty of people who have guns put on the

Unknown Speaker  54:12  
book.

Unknown Speaker  54:13  
We have a story that talks about five men in DC who had been

Unknown Speaker  54:19  
and you know, he wasn't gonna talk with this man. And he said, he explained the story of the young man who was being prosecuted for bribery. He said, You know, he had opportunity to do this other thing, I would actually prefer that he does not go to prison. And I also have the same situation, the same sort of setup with people who've actually been domestic violence situations, people who have been, you know, making the sexual assault what, you know, there are people who definitely like, you know, the person's hurt them to go to prison, but they want the harm to stop. They don't want to keep happening. And I'm sure that tons of people in this room because I know you work, let's figure it out.

Unknown Speaker  55:00  
How we get the heart to start happy and to reconcile that with our presence. But what I've typically heard, especially folks who come from work spaces, they look at the community and say, This is what the community wants. The community wants the police to do their job, they like lift up because they want the community to do this. You know, the community is demanding more policing accountable police and they want justice.

Unknown Speaker  55:23  
And I just ignore all the other people will say, well, the police because a lot of people in my community say fuck the police and fundraisers and free to jail. Yeah, listen to Lucy, you know exactly what I'm talking about. He says free to jail, folks, but my niggas out. So anyway, you don't I never actually talked about bootsy panels.

Unknown Speaker  55:42  
Today

Unknown Speaker  55:44  
this entire other subset of the community who has been giving really only present employees and giving them poses as the responsibility on which is why folks have a hard time reconciling the

Unknown Speaker  56:00  
Saying people who want to hear me and maybe sympathetics is sending people to prison. Also don't call the police which Americans.

Unknown Speaker  56:08  
Right? So it's where we have to do, or at least you know, amplify your team, to the project, something like what I'm doing because it gives people other ways and figure out soft problems that doesn't require amputation. It doesn't require the most extreme

Unknown Speaker  56:27  
ways of figuring it out. And I, one time I was in this space, and there was a bunch of progressive police there. And you know, they were talking about what it's going to feel like for people to lose their jobs is evolution happens. And

Unknown Speaker  56:45  
we feel that same way about our colleges. And we discovered a cure for cancer. When our colleges go, Oh, no, what is my return is gonna be about we need that. We can't we have to like

Unknown Speaker  57:00  
You know how to, you know, invest in radiation so we can rip people's bodies with cancer, know a college. Or maybe some I can just say that but people are protective of the research, but think about the movement around what people are willing to do to figure out answers to problems. But somehow when it comes to violence, there's the thing about it, energy resources, right not dedicated to way that we're committed to figuring out the other problems. So we're willing to you know, spend you know, the amount of resources we need to spend on health for all

Unknown Speaker  57:35  
of us. We don't want invited five k March provided

Unknown Speaker  57:42  
we have the opportunity to invest and study and figure out how to get to the root of undoing patriarchy, homophobia and liberty, all the actual underlying causes of violence, and instead, some people at the furniture where people can be

Unknown Speaker  57:56  
you know, I think there's a way to

Unknown Speaker  58:00  
Think about it too much more expansively without just, you know, assuming that that only one particular voice.

Unknown Speaker  58:13  
I mean, I think

Unknown Speaker  58:16  
more and more deep listening with folks who have actually experienced violence, I think

Unknown Speaker  58:24  
when we completely understand when the one thing that has been offered to people, when it comes to the BBC, has been police, the jails that has been sold as the exclusive solution. So I want to talk about taking that away, or thinking about a role beyond that. People get freaked out, you know, and so, when you ask people like, What do you need? The answers are the walking police in jails because that's the solution. But then I'd like to listen to what are people what is the need below but people are saying so listen for the next layer. And often they're saying

Unknown Speaker  59:00  
You know, I want this person to be accountable. Or I want to understand what happened here. And those are things that often police and courts are not equipped to do. So we,

Unknown Speaker  59:13  
one of our clients with do like it was healing from gun violence. We've been doing a lot of listening sessions with that about what can we create in terms of something that will be restorative. And one of the men he said, in order for me to heal and really move through some of this trauma, I just want to know why that store or shopping

Unknown Speaker  59:35  
because he goes through in his head that doesn't understand how this goes.

Unknown Speaker  59:39  
Is that you know, I, I do understand he's an older guy, and when I ran in like looking for help, you know, there's a fight out in the parking lot. So I ran and I probably freaked him out. I've been in the situation before and it's fine like you react like that, how many days he's going

Unknown Speaker  59:53  
to try and get in there. You know, the man who shot him and the reality is the goddess of the court system.

Unknown Speaker  1:00:00  
Never do.

Unknown Speaker  1:00:01  
Because it is not a truth seeking effort is about seeking in prosecution and punishment. And so people are not taking the stand, you know, we're going to get a plea bargain, suppress the evidence, all of this. And so, and then throw people in a cage and college justice. And so we need to create some other mechanism for people to actually be able to heal. And that is what you know, when you ask people, it's often kind of what is below that impulse that comes out as I mean, you know, this person walked up, because it's all it's a little bit on offer. And I will shout out the work to common justice in New York. So this is the one organization I believe in the country that's authorized to divert by melodies

Unknown Speaker  1:00:46  
to a restorative process. And this is something where it's one out of the things I have to get through the victim service office, and they will call up the harmed party and say, you know, you have the option here. Do you want to

Unknown Speaker  1:01:00  
keep receiving this case to the court or do you want to try restorative justice to come with justice? And over 90% of people who are victims? Or who are the parties choose common justice because we can give them answers like this and have it be a process that they are driving as opposed to the typical court process. So there are

Unknown Speaker  1:01:29  
alright sounds good.

Unknown Speaker  1:01:32  
Yeah. Do you want do you want to listen do and have done does anybody have questions audience

Unknown Speaker  1:01:48  
so as my

Unknown Speaker  1:01:55  
we had conversations about like the the

Unknown Speaker  1:02:00  
difference from yesterday. And we talked about how our society we tend to other criminals, we don't think of them as humans. So I don't necessarily know if like having activists who already had that mindset that criminals are more than just criminals. Just having don't go into the prison systems and talk to the criminals is just enough. I think that we have to get the society to look somehow in the society to look at those criminals as human beings and then from there, so like, how can we be the society

Unknown Speaker  1:02:42  
as humans instead?

Unknown Speaker  1:02:45  
Well,

Unknown Speaker  1:02:49  
this is why you imagine

Unknown Speaker  1:02:54  
how you so

Unknown Speaker  1:02:57  
thank you for

Unknown Speaker  1:02:59  
the military.

Unknown Speaker  1:03:00  
Neither with me and something has been sitting with me for this conference. And I haven't really known how to ask is it like, for example, like I know the parole, expand the system. But I've also seen the hope that it's given to somebody with a life sentence in a state that doesn't have parole and the possibility to get to them. And I've seen the impact that a more humane and mental health work into prison pipeline and clearly struggling with mental health. And I don't think they don't want these things to be like the only long term solution but I guess my question is like in life specially how do we balance being abolitionists, while also recognizing that folks who are inside have to live inside, like lowered fighting revolutions like I don't want them to have to suffer any more than they already are and how to balance those two

Unknown Speaker  1:03:48  
values.

Unknown Speaker  1:03:52  
So I was really impressed. And I guess I wanted to respect

Unknown Speaker  1:04:00  
Then he left us. He said, I was thinking about,

Unknown Speaker  1:04:04  
like this room. I think that probably people have a lot more different kinds of relationships to

Unknown Speaker  1:04:12  
discuss, you know, but I think you made a point about internally with your credentials, and their pedigree and I think that this is the contradiction in our system. Second standards that universities have cetera, is what makes possible access to these 20 fellowships and things like that. Or also to say tell people who you know, interact with each other, you know, when they're saying continue to be and it says, it's part of the least possible thing has an events and conversations but then often diverse thing women and men, the universe, they're vested in those 10 reasons. Even how much it seems egos and all kinds of things like that. And so there's a lot of dynamicism teeth out there, probably people reflect a bit more, they could open up more about their

Unknown Speaker  1:05:00  
placed into nurseries in diverse places they have nothing if you're black.

Unknown Speaker  1:05:05  
In a bigger family if you're waking up the last thing a family in terms of the frustration of being crunchwrap, Bradford lambdas ways, but now people are leaving with a ton of them about but I think he says we are really important MC civic, which is there

Unknown Speaker  1:05:19  
at the heart of the abolitionists project and thing is trying to show how horrific these conditions are slapping on cages. And what outside relational prisons, I was that I didn't space it so we're thinking that way, right? It was how normal the scene that

Unknown Speaker  1:05:36  
was the first element shunga maximum security. I couldn't believe how much the inmates were like my friends like myself or whatever else. But like every few steps, we had to go through doors, you know, security doors, but in wallkill middle of security, it felt like testing the black boarding school actually. It was like there was so much mobility from the inmates and it was so casual atmosphere

Unknown Speaker  1:06:00  
The lecture in the classroom so much my university, and still from better than my way students, and it felt I was distressed by how could it be that it's like a Blackboard is in prison. And even some of my students would be like, I'm the first one in my family go to college and have five boys within that was taking a class in prison with my first student first person in there, and then fill it with college. So it's like they had to go to prison to go to college now, and I think that you made a great point, it didn't turn the cage at all opposite thing is the black boys school. So and some of us from wallkill

Unknown Speaker  1:06:38  
braska now. So I think there's something important at the heart of the abolitionists project like to call the cages they didn't want that to be great, but how do we deal with the fact that some people was college coaching, mentorship, internships, a lot of things you said they're important about, like the experience of learning in that context that probably shadow just sensational

Unknown Speaker  1:07:06  
And there's two things I just wanted to say is, um, you know, I can see that I mean, I've been in college classrooms and universities across the country, the thing that I'm always unsettled by as people come up to me and tell me, thank you for coming, you know, my day always whispers, my day I've been marked up my sound life. Like I could see that the rooms don't suggest the way I feel. But part of the reason why I feel the way I feel is because these are all organized as if those and cost worried about the problem. Now, even with the statement that you just say, I'm not interested in anybody viewing me as human. I'm interested and you recognize in the lead up humanism, right? I'm interested in that being a subject and conversation because if you want to make me a subject, it says if I gotta do something, to prove my humanity, and even what you just say it

Unknown Speaker  1:07:55  
and it was a it was a slip, but it was just like, you know, how do we make the criminals see more

Unknown Speaker  1:08:00  
killman a part of it is that criminals get to be humans.

Unknown Speaker  1:08:04  
That's the fucked up part about the world. murderers get to be human too. Bad parents get to be human too. And I think like part of the project is to say how much harm can we deal with in a society without demanding incarceration? You're a lot people up for content.

Unknown Speaker  1:08:23  
They lock people up for bourbon. They lock people up for D us the mandatory jail sentence for the US. So we could completely shift this attack conversation. And I gotta tell you, every time somebody says we lock people up in cages, like we say, triggering language, and never say things like actually right, but I just want to say, Now I want to weaponize that term, right? Every time I come into these spaces and start talking about cages, I feel triggered

Unknown Speaker  1:08:50  
a field trip because I got people doing life. And they don't call me a man, I gotta go back in my cage. And so we're ready to be I think you could just say it.

Unknown Speaker  1:09:00  
We should not put people in prison.

Unknown Speaker  1:09:03  
I think you don't you don't have to say we should not put people in cages to make the point. Right. But we make the point about cages Mac dissatisfied me. Or affects or shamika or Jonathan, or Charles, or trade, or anybody has incarcerated, we say cages for us, because you need a proxy to make it feel like this is it that we need a proxy to make it feel like this is a bad thing. If we just say they locked up in prison doesn't seem as bad doesn't seem bad. So we gotta say it is the most brutal half of the because if you say it is like college, and if you can make that somebody a student say it is like college, that is going to be a few people to say, well, maybe we should do more that maybe we shouldn't have maximum security prisons, maybe we should just have morals minimum security places. And it's like for me, it's like how do you get past the bridge to just can see that maybe we should have at those places. But we don't have to name them. I think

Unknown Speaker  1:10:00  
They're not to make that true. Or you can just say the way I get it. You don't like the saying cages, but I'm gonna say cages and I'm like keep saying cages, because that's what I feel it is. And we can agree to disagree. I just want you to know that you actively harming me when you do that, and you're doing it for total effect, because you haven't been inside the spot. You having gripped bars, you have been like, be unassailable, because you couldn't get out and you have them like watch somebody bleed out because they sliced some some vein, try to commit suicide, you haven't listened to somebody screaming because they must get the shit beat out of them. Like you haven't earned the rank to talk about it in that way. And I think you need an arrangement on board and in a way, if you saying that actually except your rhetoric.

Unknown Speaker  1:10:52  
How do you

Unknown Speaker  1:10:54  
reconcile that with people who are currently incarcerated like

Unknown Speaker  1:10:59  
the top of

Unknown Speaker  1:11:05  
I think maybe we could agree to disagree. And I think me and a lot of people who've been incarcerated will use the same language can agree to disagree. But at the point, I think they use the link for the same for total effect. I think that they use in a language to give rhetorical strength to argument that they're making and that they recognize that prison is far more than that, that they had excellent knowledge that prison is far more than I think that like, again, at the end of the day, I mean, we could do go build a little focus when I went when I went to Angola and it's 25 cats in a circle and it's like 50 less and then right we and then we with Soros.

Unknown Speaker  1:11:43  
We go to prison will elaborate furs. Calvin was dead, nor separatists and so North a Calvinist Oh gee, so they they sponsor the trip. baseplate. Rick is in there. And the guy said we can make lawyers and nobody raised their hand and say, Brother, you can't

Unknown Speaker  1:12:00  
yourself in me, you can say you're in a lawyer. That's that's not who you are. You are a currently incarcerated individual that practices law. Right? So, I mean, I think that the

Unknown Speaker  1:12:14  
only thing is that complicated is you go to prisons across the country, and you find that what they want afraid is the conditions now when I have arguments over the language, but when I when I hit a language, that language is just a rhetorical tool that people use me some of my good friends, they should all the time and I just be like, you can do better than me. You know, cuz cuz cuz this is just like, I'm using the language of cages, and to make myself feel acceptable in this space, but then we go into a prison and nobody saying, and so, you know, I would say, I don't know I don't speak for everybody who has been in prison, like, in fact, I disagree with everybody, just just like donation, you know, but, but I'm telling you how

Unknown Speaker  1:13:00  
failure, you know, and movie, it is not in you to respond to my emotional and visceral emotional response to how this is framed. And so I don't know how I will respond to what he said it also will know the context. And when he said it, but I know when I was in gravely on a panel, and somebody was like we need to do is like humanize people is incarcerated. And they kept the same that had been incarcerated. And I was like, Fuck that. I don't gotta humanize nobody. Why I got a human aspect, but it's already human. That is not my project as an artist. That is not my project as a writer. So, you know, we can disagree, but I know to do some prison when I said that. They'd like they started clapping. And they recognize that it is something demeaning about thinking that you always got to prove that you wanted something.

Unknown Speaker  1:13:49  
Nobody else got approved in the morning something like why do I have to prove that I'm born in the car jack mathematize. I'm gonna take that as a given and move to my wife as if that's

Unknown Speaker  1:14:00  
Given and if you think I need to prove more than I want to remind you will have a good choosing to accept to dehumanize me in excess dehumanizing itself. Like, I don't want to be the subject anymore I want to be, I want to be reflected on the oppressive society as the subject than a discussion.

Unknown Speaker  1:14:22  
So just just briefly, because we have a line and we want to get to the audience as much as possible.

Unknown Speaker  1:14:29  
Like I appreciate your question. I think that part of the, you know, the, the idea that somebody goes to prison to get certain resources are education. I think the problem is that we're not providing those kinds of resources for people on the outside, that that, you know, if if, instead of locking people up, gave people opportunities, and invested resources in the schools and invested resources and housing and invested resources and jobs for people

Unknown Speaker  1:15:00  
Proceeding, this wouldn't look like dating now.

Unknown Speaker  1:15:06  
I think I mean, along those lines, I think listening to the call this morning.

Unknown Speaker  1:15:12  
He's talking about like 20 3040 years ahead, or how am I going to

Unknown Speaker  1:15:18  
survive this next time? You're just thinking about the ways that having heard so many folks in Detroit saying, you know, growing up in my neighborhood, I didn't really think past 22. And so what it means that suddenly people are thinking about longevity for the first time in prison when they're facing several decades out, I mean, so there's something fundamental there, like, why can't we have people think about longevity, imagining futures dreaming before it ever happened to land in a prison? I appreciate the question about harm reduction that came up so you know, how can we, as lawyers do work really suffering here right now? I think there's a bunch of waiting for harm reduction. I think that my

Unknown Speaker  1:16:00  
Last night laid out some really good questions to ask to understand, are you doing something that is a performance or non performance before? And I think that those are questions that in our practice, we're asking every day, about a different. And so, you know, things like, you know, this big move for a while to build

Unknown Speaker  1:16:22  
it should he focus on like building nurseries in prisons and gender responsive prisons and all of this? Or should you be looking at diverting people out of prison. So they are hoping the communities raising their children, and just understanding the consequences if you choose a certain path. You know, in Detroit, that is all about conditions argument, always about conditions that we think about when they put out the idea of building a new channel is always a liberal humanitarian impulse that have gotten this precisely where we are. And so I think it's about rejecting that, and understanding that we can still improve conditions in certain ways, but

Unknown Speaker  1:17:00  
Ensure that we're not increasing the footprint of the personalistic.

Unknown Speaker  1:17:05  
Yes. So let us as we find that right now.

Unknown Speaker  1:17:10  
That's what that's me saying.

Unknown Speaker  1:17:14  
Before I was before my current position our project on a campaign called close to work house, and it was a campaign that is, you know, in St. Louis, around the jail. And as a part of that campaign, we're working with the organizer who leaves a campaign, a few of them were in the work house, which is an expression to continually share. And as a part of that campaign, not only are there two with two cases that are actively going on against the workhouse, one is a conditions case. And the other is a belt, a belt with my case, those two pieces of litigation around the reform and the condition of a campaign supposed to do. And I don't know if I need to say this

Unknown Speaker  1:18:00  
Anyway, I have never met one serious abolitionist organizer, who has been like what conditions I never met one.

Unknown Speaker  1:18:10  
Never met an abolitionist organizer who is caught

Unknown Speaker  1:18:15  
between figuring out we're going to help people who are currently in prison. Or if we're going to just shut the clothes. Everybody says wholesale. Most of the times I've worked on mega series, abolition is working in conjunction with people who are currently or formerly incarcerated who are trying to post institution information from ability. So I know that that kind of comes up a lot like what do we do about people who are facing, you know, health issues and stuff right now? I've never I've

Unknown Speaker  1:18:44  
never actually seen that in practice. And so I think all the work houses one of many campaigns is going around the country that's using our performance reforms that we the agent suffering people who are formerly incarcerated, currently incarcerated, but also China.

Unknown Speaker  1:19:00  
shut down the president import open. That's

Unknown Speaker  1:19:07  
right.

Unknown Speaker  1:19:10  
Thank you all for all the work that you're doing, Amanda, I'm from Detroit, and I'd like to trade.

Unknown Speaker  1:19:19  
But my question is for I go into a lot of these spaces, and I'm very fortunate to be here by also spent time working as a public defender. And so the question that I have is, do you have any insights or thoughts about people who are doing energy defense wants to do it through an abolitionist framework, because the nature of that work makes it very hard to be

Unknown Speaker  1:19:45  
imaginative when you're dealing with immediate harm in trying to help people right now today.

Unknown Speaker  1:19:57  
What's going on? Thanks. Thanks very much.

Unknown Speaker  1:20:00  
So get opened up this conference with

Unknown Speaker  1:20:04  
sort of reflecting on the relationship between universities and the prison industrial complex. Most of the folks in this room have affiliations with universities. I also have a degree from BlueJeans detention.

Unknown Speaker  1:20:18  
And

Unknown Speaker  1:20:19  
one of the things that I've been involved in that, I think is a little small chunk of question, is that investment in universities and prison. So I have sort of a multi faceted question for y'all from both lawyer perspective and educated.

Unknown Speaker  1:20:35  
I mean, people just affiliated with universities. So first and foremost, shout out to all the student organizers doing work in divestment, particularly the Harford prison divestment campaign.

Unknown Speaker  1:20:49  
So my first question is

Unknown Speaker  1:20:53  
shit, let me see how tough it is because I'm not a problem at UConn now. So I think there's different considerations legal

Unknown Speaker  1:21:00  
To think about Harvard versus UConn, just where

Unknown Speaker  1:21:03  
we're at. So how can we use legal resources in order to pressure these universities to disclose their dominance and have a more concrete idea of where the money's going

Unknown Speaker  1:21:15  
to how can we better organize across student faculty and staff lines in order to get these universities to divest

Unknown Speaker  1:21:26  
and three, just any general ideas for organizing efforts or unique insights that happens as legal folks to to, for us to take back to these campuses to say, fuck the Charles of

Unknown Speaker  1:21:41  
universities.

Unknown Speaker  1:21:47  
I want to thank y'all for your

Unknown Speaker  1:21:50  
commitment

Unknown Speaker  1:21:57  
with the fact that I definitely

Unknown Speaker  1:22:02  
Okay.

Unknown Speaker  1:22:05  
So I want to preface my question with,

Unknown Speaker  1:22:09  
you know, just letting you know that I want to see proof

Unknown Speaker  1:22:14  
of work.

Unknown Speaker  1:22:23  
And

Unknown Speaker  1:22:25  
we talk about talk about justice. Justice is something I definitely want to see. Talk about humanity. And I want everybody, you know, humanized, but as a victim of criminal violence, and how terrorizing

Unknown Speaker  1:22:44  
when you talk about restorative justice, curious about what that looks like, and why a conversation that goes fully into what what

Unknown Speaker  1:22:57  
would

Unknown Speaker  1:22:59  
you know

Unknown Speaker  1:23:10  
Hello, I have a two part question. So the first question is, what would be your advice on the current law student? What would be your advice for someone seeking to be a progressive prosecutor in taking that approach?

Unknown Speaker  1:23:28  
And the second part is when we have these conversations about prison reform or racism or anything like that, those new topics, what we hear vice about inviting people into the room, I need to be there to hear it. First. is it always me with people that always here who want to make the change but needing to have those people in the room to just make it more advanced?

Unknown Speaker  1:23:57  
Thank you for those fantastic questions.

Unknown Speaker  1:24:00  
The other day on divestment. I think one approaches launching a simultaneous campaign for investment. And that's one of the things that I've been as the divestment campaign has been underway at Harvard, been speaking to the administration about so how, how does this University have a responsibility

Unknown Speaker  1:24:20  
to the Boston community and communities in Massachusetts and prisons? And how can we invest in educational opportunities for people who are incarcerated and use Harvard resources to do so while also using Harvard resources to support community, the various community groups in in their campaigns and to help them reach their needs to help work with them to address to think about dynamic research, questions and programs. So I think, you know, in addition to disclosure and divesting, we can also push these universities to invest in new ways because again, it's going to take these universities to help

Unknown Speaker  1:25:01  
decarceration to end mass incarceration.

Unknown Speaker  1:25:06  
In terms of I think that students don't always recognize the power that they have. I think that students and alumni at universities and at Harvard, have a lot of power so that faculty members and students and alumni start protesting the administration listens. And that's true Harvard, that's true at all universities. So students should really harness their power and work with alumni to harness power.

Unknown Speaker  1:25:35  
In terms of getting the last question, the second part of last question in terms of having conversations with not just preaching to the choir, because I think it's true many times, you know, we are, we might not agree on tactics and strategies, but we are like minded and I think that that's going to require us to go outside of our comfort zone

Unknown Speaker  1:25:58  
and have

Unknown Speaker  1:26:00  
tough conversations, challenge people who we disagree with, sit down with police, sit down with prosecutors, sit down with conservatives and have dialogue about these issues.

Unknown Speaker  1:26:17  
So many good questions. It's putting a couple of them at one, I think, on this last point about who are we talking with grossly down with, I think it's really important that before we sit down with folks, we give ourselves the space to understand what we want and what we're demanding. So if anyone actually had this conversation with somebody like a leader in police reform, a police officer, and he says the

Unknown Speaker  1:26:42  
conversations, they don't invite us because they're going to need us to be on board again today. And I said, you know, when you show up with a gun on your hip and in any uniform or you just like those people's imaginations shut off, because there is a mutual response to your presence. And so first of all, having

Unknown Speaker  1:27:00  
spaces where we are able to imagine without them there. And then x strategically it is, you know, the next step in building power and fighting for change to have those conversations, but having your own agenda setting and dreaming space first.

Unknown Speaker  1:27:15  
Likely awesome. There are questions where restorative justice Yeah, so I think that is something where I want to maybe just point folks to some resources because it is a much deeper thing to dig into. There's this website transform harm.org and there's a lot of resources you know, when it comes to what people have already been doing and experimenting with at the local level when it comes to accountability processes, to addressing harm against common justice, and they have a video series that they're working on right now that uplifts you know, stories like the ones of our clients and betrayed on this call ever after. And so it's um, you know, videos of people who have been victims of crime or survived harm. I'm talking about what the process will be to do the one or two

Unknown Speaker  1:28:00  
Venter process was that the fight? And I think it's great lots more stories and resources from people who have been through a process like this point to those and some places to start.

Unknown Speaker  1:28:12  
You should I can't remember, obviously, Justice organization, but impact justice because the reality is like common justice explicitly doesn't deal with sexual violence. Right. And so I think like one of the things that frequently goes on stated in a room like this is when we talk about the kind of balance that demands that we feel like demands a different kind of response that we feel like, isn't heard. We're talking about the fact that people don't really talk about sexual violence, or intimate partner violence to the degree that makes people who have been victims of those things feel like they are being heard. And we don't as a job as organization, explicitly. mec job herself explicitly deals with this and thinks about this and works on this as an issue. And she does restorative practice circles in prisons. Women who have

Unknown Speaker  1:29:01  
Like her people were posted, right? And so I think that that we do actually have to find resources. And sometimes we have to invent the resources that actually don't exist. But the first step in those resources is, you know, it's sometimes I feel like it's easy to have a conversation here, as if it's just like the police as the enemy. And and frequently it is the police as the enemy. Right. But sometimes it's me. You know, some dummy. I mean, think about my mom got raped, like,

Unknown Speaker  1:29:30  
two months after I got locked up. And it was a public defender, who represented the rapist who have raped three black women.

Unknown Speaker  1:29:37  
In a public defender, told my mom she was lying. I can't wait to talk to this dude. I can't wait to understand his explanation for why he thought that that was justice that that was his duty that that was his responsibility. And the thing but then the thing about it though, is this should happen to my mom is a prison. She never told me.

Unknown Speaker  1:29:58  
I came home she told me that they I came

Unknown Speaker  1:30:00  
And we didn't talk about it for another decade.

Unknown Speaker  1:30:03  
Then some random podcast was like I love to interview you and your mom, I love what you talk about your mom, would you want to be on a podcast? And I was like, Fuck no. I don't want to be on that damn podcast. But she grows on the Aster.

Unknown Speaker  1:30:17  
You will get a podcast. Yeah, love to have you.

Unknown Speaker  1:30:23  
It's like, okay, I don't know. Well, really prepared. We just had to show up. The woman asked my mom, how did you deal with your son facing life in prison? How did you deal with going to court everything she said was challenging because at the same time, I was going to court to get the man convicted rate the whole way we haven't we we talked about this in a decade.

Unknown Speaker  1:30:43  
And that is I'm trying to say that our public conversations, I can only talk about it now because she talked about it on the podcast. So our public conversations, to a large degree match our private conversations. And I think we got to figure out how to change the public conversation and then

Unknown Speaker  1:31:00  
And then it was just two other things I want to respond to really briefly is, I think a couple people saying that you know, I got clients who fight for grow with the city that have grown the state of achievement and happy world. The great thing about this November 5 is that the fact that it was my birthday

Unknown Speaker  1:31:16  
was that was there like, but like Virginia when blue. So Virginia hasn't had grown since 1995.

Unknown Speaker  1:31:25  
And the entire eight and a half years I spent the prison every year with no parole is going to come back and not think that the abolitionists eat those it should be in is saying, Okay, how do I fight to bring people back in the gym, while thinking long term about how to end our systems of incarceration. So you fight for the client to get the client off the ground, and you end up fight for the client, get the client out of prison, even if you know that the way in which you responded to the harm that this person might of course could have to the community or the way in which you're making sure that the person was victimized to say

Unknown Speaker  1:32:00  
is woefully inadequate at represented. I mean, I was only public defender for a year. And I had multiple cases where it's like, I don't know if my grab somebody else, but I'm damn sure we'll try keep them out of prison.

Unknown Speaker  1:32:12  
It's an imperfect solution. And I think you keep doing it admitting that is imperfect. It making it like, you know, I'd rather do this than lock somebody up. And then the last point will actually hire prosecutors. I shouldn't say it's in the room like this, it makes me feel kind of dirty, you know, especially if that is so critical. Well, like this dude is critical, and he hire cops. But I will say,

Unknown Speaker  1:32:38  
again, I think of it this way. Me I just think of myself would like to spook this episode of the door. And I'm trying to figure out how people who are put in these positions of power, make their decisions and what does it mean to be if we like out of a conversation? And so I you know, I go into the room, and I try to prep stuff about questions like have you ever been to a prison? What is it that you're going to do when your job to manage

Unknown Speaker  1:33:00  
Success be rooted and have any convictions you get when is the young black woman is bringing about whenever first trial and as a DUI child as a mandatory 120 days in jail excellent book How would our life be fucked up if she had to go away 420 days and again that's like an imperfect solution but the reason nobody wants to be a progressive prosecutor anyway they want to be a progressive da they want to be he they don't want to be like the equivalent of the public defender that just got a bit because that shit is grunt work you know actually is hard and it is thankless and you are horrible human being if you doing but

Unknown Speaker  1:33:39  
I shouldn't say it and don't repeat

Unknown Speaker  1:33:42  
that again record.

Unknown Speaker  1:33:45  
Alright, so

Unknown Speaker  1:33:50  
the next question

Unknown Speaker  1:33:52  
was I thought that was nice. Okay, so I think the

Unknown Speaker  1:33:58  
question so

Unknown Speaker  1:34:00  
big organizations, for example, in New York City, who were at least wherever

Unknown Speaker  1:34:06  
it is, okay, so I think what was so powerful about those defenders is that they sided with the note jails campaign in fighting against building capacity just so not only were they managing unmanageable caseload they were also organizing against, like mass incarceration and the expansion of sleep. So I think it's I think it I think it is it is important I think that is not gonna it's not like the absence of progressive prosecute movement is not like the answer for fixing incarceration. I do think it keeps it keeps people out of jail, but I really appreciate when public defenders go step further organization.

Unknown Speaker  1:34:45  
And then the progressive prosecutor question I told you, I am happy every time every time and it's exactly that introduction. I think if you want to become a cop Garrett is the way to do that without approaching that another day. I think

Unknown Speaker  1:35:00  
That I know that people want to become a progressive district attorney. I think that if you have a vision of going to law school, we should change to figure out how to use the law to do that by unimaginable, it's impossible.

Unknown Speaker  1:35:15  
And if you go to a community organizer, and they decide that as a strategy of what they're trying to do, they want people to go into that position. I think that you should talk with it and think about it. But don't think that should be a dream of and I used to dream big when people dream big created slavery, so I don't just think Jamie was a good man. I think I used to think critically drain critically.

Unknown Speaker  1:35:44  
So so really quickly, I'm just going to ask that we'd be very disciplined in our questions. We have four left, just ask those and then for the panelists just go down the line you can pick and choose as you want to. Thank you.

Unknown Speaker  1:35:59  
Our attendees

Unknown Speaker  1:36:01  
This makes it really easy.

Unknown Speaker  1:36:04  
Dwayne when you said your first remarks with the resume, which is funny, because we've talked about with your experience with very different lives.

Unknown Speaker  1:36:14  
But I've been thinking about, like, I've been waiting for people this conference as a little like baby,

Unknown Speaker  1:36:21  
for people to talk about three people in prisons, people who relate specifically address flatlines people,

Unknown Speaker  1:36:27  
specifically, like address indigenous people.

Unknown Speaker  1:36:31  
And I've been waiting for that. I haven't really gotten into that. And maybe this isn't quite the panel

Unknown Speaker  1:36:40  
is going to ask all y'all like,

Unknown Speaker  1:36:48  
just like

Unknown Speaker  1:36:57  
yes. Not that you have to answer this question.

Unknown Speaker  1:37:12  
You mentioned a program that a doctor started with the choice.

Unknown Speaker  1:37:19  
I wasn't able to.

Unknown Speaker  1:37:22  
Do you think that that program serves as a lot of

Unknown Speaker  1:37:27  
the conversations we've been having here?

Unknown Speaker  1:37:35  
Thank you. You're amazing people, everyone here amazing people. So my question is not really just to the panel, but in light of what the panel is about. I think this is the appropriate time to ask. My question is for everybody who is a criminal, and what is chrome? Because there is a whole lot of harm going on in the world. There's murder. There's robbery, there's the soul.

Unknown Speaker  1:38:00  
There's amazing things happening at astronomical levels. But we are not looking at it collectively and on a large scale, who is holding the liabilities of the world accountable for the tremendous amounts of harm they're doing at to the drug crisis we now have in this country.

Unknown Speaker  1:38:23  
God bless Garrett pointing out the obese of the world. I propose that maybe part of what needs to enter this dialogue is complete and utter transparency in the system as a whole. Because those people who are sitting in prison by far are not the only people who have committed crimes or who are doing harm to people into society into the world at large. So I appreciate your statement on the cage. I don't call it a cage. I call it a box because we've limited in horrifically, not with just us inside and with the world at large.

Unknown Speaker  1:39:02  
Hi, everybody.

Unknown Speaker  1:39:07  
My brainwaves expose these convenings they're always different in the same things come up with things that always comes up is that we hear, say over and over again that we haven't talked about the list. The list is always different, but there's always a list. So the question is how might be possible to have these kinds of convening in a useful and meaningful way to spire out our differences, and not at the end say, oh, but we didn't cover the whole goddamn list together. And this is no shade on anybody who just listed, but it is a problem because the first thing I wanted to say and the second thing is related to the first we're actually not thinking the same. This is not a group of like minded people.

Unknown Speaker  1:40:01  
People who came together thinking maybe we have something to say to each other, but it is foolish for us to think that we're like an atom bomb differences in this room, some of which I really want to work out sparring with Dwayne is one of my main major activities. Now I'm serious. I'm serious. perspectivism

Unknown Speaker  1:40:20  
but those two things are the same thing.

Unknown Speaker  1:40:38  
Yeah, I'm, like Dwayne, I didn't have I just got a year ago. And the biggest challenge like for me moving from like prison, which is a whole different world where I mean like everyone's trying to earn the swastika. You know what I mean? And then I come to a space like this, like, super progressive and i think i mean

Unknown Speaker  1:41:00  
making that transition, just you know, I grew up real liberal parents and, you know, I had those values instilled in me, but still spending 10 years or eight and a half years in a place that, you know, enforces that is really hard. So, you know, when I got out, I got

Unknown Speaker  1:41:16  
I got involved with this organizations, abolitionist organization, and they were pitching me abolition, and I'm thinking all right, yeah, let's tear down the prisons. That sounds good.

Unknown Speaker  1:41:26  
But as I kind of, like really thought about it,

Unknown Speaker  1:41:30  
you know, I mean, there's a lot of dudes in there that you don't want to live in, in your neighborhood. You know, I'm not saying they're irredeemable. Or they can be, you know, keel, but where they're at now, they're going to use any of these little programs and stuff. They're just going to manipulate it to, to find their own things, you know. And so, so I started thinking about that and asking those questions, you know, like, how do we deal with that? How do we hold people on

Unknown Speaker  1:42:00  
accountable. Because, because that's the one thing that I've been really big on and I haven't been able to get a real straight answer is like, how do we hold people accountable? That's an effective way to do it, not just lip service, or this is this would be nice if we could have this, you know. So I guess that's my question.

Unknown Speaker  1:42:29  
I gotta say it was so funny because he was like, you know, everybody got in our chat room, nice watch the could everybody do it was like, Nah, I don't like that at all.

Unknown Speaker  1:42:41  
It didn't even bother me though. Rudy's point is, I think, right part of it. Is that

Unknown Speaker  1:42:47  
something you'd be afraid to say publicly? And when I was talking about earlier, I'm from Alabama, I think he was talking about summonable. How, like resonance really damaging. And I think instead of saying cage, you might say that the

Unknown Speaker  1:43:00  
Institutions actually really lead to all kinds of harm and articulate and this is why we shouldn't have them. So that's my one point to that is, as you can think through how to address those things. And because abolition is not a tomorrow project, and part of whatever you choose to do with the rest of the attack can be thinking about day issue, because I think that's one of those issues that a lot of people don't touch. And then I just say what I'm thinking is not profound. And every every poem, every book, every book that are published, has talked about,

Unknown Speaker  1:43:29  
you know, men in prison, who are homosexual, has talked about trans folks in prison, has talked about not as much land next folks in prison, but but I tried to write a book and show them that to make us have conversations that are quite uncomfortable. And sometimes it's uncomfortable for me because I writing the first verse in the lab, which means that, like I end up holding on and I end up presenting all of that, as if it's like the substance of my experiences, and it's not always so but I would suggest maybe

Unknown Speaker  1:44:01  
Respectfully, some of the things that didn't come up on a stage or in the conference as literally to do with intention, but everything to do with timing, and maybe one benefit of a room like that in a space like this. It's also movie say something that the last officer that these things always to energize anyone you know, you don't go home, and it's not a community that is in this room knows, you come into this room and build a community and just do that return home. So maybe the point about that is maybe, you know, we can think about an insignificant thing and do anytime we have space like that is walk away with a list that everybody won't make use of the list. But it's all kinds of resources, some of those questions, like the main years of research, to answer all the main some legit practical skill in that area to be able to give a response just sit on a panel. And so even thinking about how we call a question is how we call it ideas thinking about this and the same type of workshop space that a man is created in Detroit because sometimes we

Unknown Speaker  1:45:00  
They're really good ideas that come up. And I think they probably just just drift away for them. So I saw the thing about

Unknown Speaker  1:45:06  
that as an admin.

Unknown Speaker  1:45:09  
So there were a couple of specific questions there. One was about one of the hospital based programs. So that's called Detroit life is Bible every day do you live? that's run by Ray widens and Tony schmoopy. And yes, it is one example of stuff that's happening a lot of cities. So they are part of a national network and let me just change his name, but it was very recently called the hospital based violence prevention network. So there are places around the country that are trying to look at what is a social determinants of health, dealing with underlying issues of trauma, when it comes to hospitals as a potential site of progressive violence. The question actually around industries, defense of defender offices, I would say and it's been interesting in Detroit now that we have the new public vendor office to see how can public defenders do work that is remit and organizing and power building. I was

Unknown Speaker  1:46:00  
A lot like Derek is that, you know, be sure that you are going to the community meetings of folks who are already organized around this. So, you know,

Unknown Speaker  1:46:10  
wherever folks are there's people organizing around issues and figuring out how as lawyers, can you go to their meetings, not holding things and making people come to you, but go ahead and people who are already organizing, I think that people have figured out ways to use indigent defense as a site to build power. So people who are doing court watching Raja Dev and Silicon Valley debug doing participatory defense hubs. So there are ways to use the individual case in the courtroom as a site for building power towards broader aims like shutting down jails and things like that. And they're really good models that people are starting to use. The trick, I think, is how to get officers to commit to that type of work so that people aren't working extremely long hours with a huge caseload and then having to go after hours to do that. But that's another

Unknown Speaker  1:46:54  
the last one I mean, I really appreciate it would want like, like Dwayne the same

Unknown Speaker  1:47:00  
All to think about the place where we are not showing up fully, where we feel uncomfortable or feel put off. But all you know, for various reasons, think about why that is. And you know, listening for who the people, you know, for not being here who are not even present here, and understanding that those are the sites that we should really be listening to. And because that's often where, you know, wherever we're going to next will come from. And so I think, I love that people are raising and talking about the fact of like, what makes them uncomfortable about the space, and then link up with other people. So if you have the same thought about why are we talking about queer folks and trans folks find each other and I think that, you know, also recognizing that those things that aren't being talked about here, someone is talking about them. So there are lots of folks you know, around the country who are doing that type of work and so linking up listening to people who are doing it and following it when you can

Unknown Speaker  1:47:57  
the question about

Unknown Speaker  1:48:00  
Crime and criminal. And if you've never stolen anything from the self checkout line, you're missing out.

Unknown Speaker  1:48:10  
This doesn't happen.

Unknown Speaker  1:48:12  
So there is

Unknown Speaker  1:48:14  
always

Unknown Speaker  1:48:17  
a crisis for growth. I would say stuff like, you know, somehow not criminal to poison the entire city. So when I put poison into your cup, and you die, I will certainly go to jail. So yes, it's, you know, I mean, critical resistance and then materials have a lot of interesting ways for us to reframe and think about how disturbing poverty versus crime so like to

Unknown Speaker  1:48:42  
this point, you know, these narratives in stasis conversations have been happening for the last 3035 years, actually awesome. Really quickly, someone mentioned like the how do we see criminals as human, Frederick Douglass his autobiography as his paragraph where he talks about whether white people stop

Unknown Speaker  1:49:00  
You know, slaves as black people saw them as human. And he says, well, they see us human enough to have you know, 48, punishable by death to kill us. So they expect us to know the laws and follow it. So of course they see as a human, what the problem is that they see themselves as super human rights violated dehumanizing sub human eyes, in fact, it's more powerful white supremacy does affect

Unknown Speaker  1:49:25  
me. The third thing that I heard someone say was about why aren't you know, they haven't heard queer people, you know, being

Unknown Speaker  1:49:34  
brought up in space. I think it's very important to me, because we live in a society that phobic and if I was at a conference, where there was people who probably I didn't cover those identities and they weren't helped me out and surely got frustrated. But I think

Unknown Speaker  1:49:51  
one of the ways I really like questions we asked is, you know, who's talking about these things and half of the talk about more, and I know Amanda

Unknown Speaker  1:50:00  
By done this work I know I often travel with them that have reported being Joe and

Unknown Speaker  1:50:07  
I talked about how folks who are incarcerated who experiencing disability this disease it constantly parser is exactly based by the nature of your disability or activity translates to solitary confinement, how those, you know, how the prison is basically set up to commit other types of

Unknown Speaker  1:50:29  
bleeding, you know, additional support for the reason why it should be abolished, there is no gender affirming space that can reconcile.

Unknown Speaker  1:50:39  
So those conversations have not yet been certainly introduced. Now, as I'm sure people have not yet said through intentionality. I know again, for people whose role in their work, and then the last one, I would say, is to not

Unknown Speaker  1:50:58  
I surely

Unknown Speaker  1:51:00  
Hope that we don't take for granted how people identify, just generally this one time, I was at a convening, and there was an organizer who was being really critical of lawyers who were talking about religion, and I was there. And he said, you know, what, I have a child, what am I gonna tell my child? You know, what am I looking in the face and say, you know, when capitalism? And I was like, right, I have two kids, I have two boys.

Unknown Speaker  1:51:26  
And I have the same sense of conversations with them. You know. So I think that it's a we also don't know how people identify generally. And you're right. directly, people often lead with accolades and titles, and I think that people have should have,

Unknown Speaker  1:51:42  
you know, how that ties into design

Unknown Speaker  1:51:45  
space, you know, without sounding like a 45 minute talk or yesterday.

Unknown Speaker  1:51:53  
So while that

Unknown Speaker  1:51:55  
might introduce

Unknown Speaker  1:51:57  
this person, from our lawyer, and then

Unknown Speaker  1:52:00  
Formal panelists speak about, you know, prison abolition of the law or when they get

Unknown Speaker  1:52:06  
to jail. And this is something that's like a regular occurrence. And what I found is that I hear people sometimes use either their effectiveness or their proximity to directly impact them is to have a certain kind of credibility to leverage against other people. And it's not all the time but sometimes I don't want internet space charging. So I own that story in order to give me more legitimacy to criticize the car, some say because everyone

Unknown Speaker  1:52:32  
that comes to the place

Unknown Speaker  1:52:35  
so so, you know, I didn't decide.

Unknown Speaker  1:52:45  
You know

Unknown Speaker  1:52:46  
what I was in jail, and it turns out he's in jail because it's constitutional for 24 hours. That's fine.

Unknown Speaker  1:53:00  
For him, but the cop didn't care anyway.

Unknown Speaker  1:53:04  
And that's, again, the competition of violence like that I'm talking about him one day, it happens every day. But this is just an important part of that, even though people may not lead with being queer or talking about being attacked, it doesn't mean that this exists. So

Unknown Speaker  1:53:23  
thank you all.

Unknown Speaker  1:53:30  
And return to something that I opened with this idea of companies of care. I think. Following up on what Amanda says feeling like your identity is marginalized or that you're not being heard or that what's important to you isn't the discuss or that it's contested in some way. I think it is really key to build community and to build love and to respond to people who may be other institutions with love.

Unknown Speaker  1:53:58  
The question about crime and criminals is

Unknown Speaker  1:54:00  
important one. And just to follow up on the Derek mentioned, I think you know so much of it has to do with how we think about violence and get some be violent.

Unknown Speaker  1:54:08  
And of course, the very idea of crime is reflects racism, classism, patriarchal society that we're in. So that, you know, the Michigan legislature and the governor, employees and millions of people or 10s of thousands of people in Flint are not seen as criminals, but the person who does get caught stealing from the subtype Right, exactly. Subject line is seen as a criminal. So I think, again, you know, in the sphere of pushing past some of the categories that we

Unknown Speaker  1:54:43  
that we live within that we take for granted and thinking about,

Unknown Speaker  1:54:47  
you know, how we can present challenges to the power structures that establish these these various categories, I think is something that we need to think about forward

Unknown Speaker  1:55:04  
is a fantastic discussion I was gonna

Unknown Speaker  1:55:16  
say

Unknown Speaker  1:55:18  
executive decision just say fuck it, we're just gonna go straight into the next panel just so we can get back on track and so people don't have to stand the 45 minute talk line. You still might but so we'll bring up the next panel immediately if you want to go to the bathroom, feel free to bring get started.

Unknown Speaker  2:04:53  
All right, if you did please take your seats we're going to get going with the next panel

Unknown Speaker  2:05:05  
Thank you

Unknown Speaker  2:06:43  
Testing

Unknown Speaker  2:06:47  
Good morning

Unknown Speaker  2:06:50  
Good morning everyone and welcome to the university and the prison panel. My name is Jody Skipper and I am

Unknown Speaker  2:07:00  
here to welcome you all. And also let you know just a little bit about this panelists format. I esteemed panelists will give brief introductions, and then have a q&a with each other. Our audience q&a will be about 20 minutes after that. So thank you for being here and Please enjoy.

Unknown Speaker  2:07:27  
Going to introduce ourselves go.

Unknown Speaker  2:07:29  
Okay. Good afternoon. It's I'm really pleased and excited to be here. My name is Michelle Jones. I'm a third year doctoral student at NYU. I'm an artist and activist and a scholar.

Unknown Speaker  2:07:44  
My name is Cathy Dean.

Unknown Speaker  2:07:48  
I just want to say that I think this this panel is about the university and prisons and I think that thanks to garetty witness conferences has been in his introductory speech. It's a pretty good example of things that

Unknown Speaker  2:08:00  
can be done inside of a university in college,

Unknown Speaker  2:08:05  
the CO director of the Center for Justice at Columbia University, and

Unknown Speaker  2:08:10  
I worked with my, my colleague from prison, met there and didn't work there. And I guess I would say on the organizer and an educator and somebody wants to fight for a better world.

Unknown Speaker  2:08:29  
Hi, my name is serenus that I am the Executive Director of operation restoration and work is a organization that focuses on incarcerated and formerly incarcerated women and girls. And we try to remove as many barriers as possible so women can access successful reentry. We focus on education on that we run a pilot improvement program in partnership with University in New York. And the reason that I started with this work was at the age of 19. I was sentenced to 120

Unknown Speaker  2:09:00  
20 months of federal prison, 20 years in state prison, and $1.9 million in restitution as sir nine years in two months that was released at the age of 29. But when I was released from prison, I had taken college courses while I was incarcerated. And try to apply it goes to the university environment is once I was raised, and I was the backpack and soon to be due to have to check the box on the application. So two years later, I reapply to the university, uncheck the box use the same application. And that was great that admission along with scholarships. So once I graduated from the University of New Orleans and altitude was where I got my degree from a clinical laboratory science it became a part of my life's work to remove as many barriers education as possible. So in 2017, we pass legislation to remove the backstop of college application

Unknown Speaker  2:09:55  
purposes of

Unknown Speaker  2:09:59  
making the leap

Unknown Speaker  2:10:00  
And the first thing to do that, and we have successfully worked with advocates on the grounds that are moving in the state of Maryland, the state of Colorado, the state of Washington, and will be working in 15 states over the next two years to provide the same legislation.

Unknown Speaker  2:10:19  
Morning, everyone. I'm Alex Kim. I am an educator of the organizer. I teach with a collective at a maximum security prison in Illinois. I also teach at the University of Chicago where I directed in the right clap that is

Unknown Speaker  2:10:39  
that is involving students in community and human rights work that addresses mass incarceration.

Unknown Speaker  2:10:50  
So we

Unknown Speaker  2:11:02  
Kathy's running, decided that instead of doing the 10 minute presentation format, he really just wanted to be in conversation with one another. And in conversation with all of you, we want to make sure that there's a lot of time for dialogue. So I am going to ask Michelle, to, to respond to this question of what do the universities or people who are incarcerated and formerly incarcerated?

Unknown Speaker  2:11:32  
Sure, thank you.

Unknown Speaker  2:11:35  
So I gave a brief introduction about telling you a little bit more about my experience by education prison. I was incarcerated the state of Indiana for 20 years, and having access to higher education meant that there was a university available. There was access to computers to do the work. There was an actual valid curriculum, but one of the main problems was

Unknown Speaker  2:12:00  
Is that the University of two universities there? The first university did not share a creative consortium or understanding of degrees or credits. And last one. So when one of them left, and I was at a senior senior

Unknown Speaker  2:12:16  
at Emory University, or university left, and I had to transfer my credits to Ball State, that transfer cost me 46 credits in the same location in the prison which I was located. So what do universities have incarcerated formerly incarcerated students, they own their continuity of a college experience that is quality. That is credits real credits for real work.

Unknown Speaker  2:12:46  
That is a creating a community in which the student has a if not the same, but a very near college experience that they would have

Unknown Speaker  2:12:57  
on campus. They also

Unknown Speaker  2:13:00  
are old, a pathway completing that degree program as they move around facilities. And as they once they get home, they used to be a clear path of that. So those of you who are actually thinking about creating college programs and you love the idea of teaching in prisons, and you have great experiences in that, if your program does not confer real credit, then don't bring that program right into prison. With the understanding it's a college program, beginning as extracurricular cardmaking bring it as a rec activities, whatever, because a college education is all is about a real credential. Right? So the credits must be real, and they must be able to

Unknown Speaker  2:13:51  
actually receive a degree. Also, the experience of cutting into college program while incarcerated. If you're thinking about making a program and

Unknown Speaker  2:14:00  
We oriented from the experience of the actual student. So while faculty members experiences are important, while Department of Corrections have a role to play, the students experiences must be it must be the orientation in which you think about what a college program looks like. So what does that mean? Thinking about what are they going to do with their textbooks? How much pens and paper are they going to be allowed to have? Thinking about those things at the front end, thinking about what what happens when they go to law, if they if they go off thinking about what happens to their property? The reason why I say this is because some departments of corrections use the fact that we have access to higher education as a way in which to discipline and punish us.

Unknown Speaker  2:14:46  
And if you're looking to be an administrator or programming person, bringing that into bringing that experience into you must orient yourself and your program from the spirit of the student. That means going in without show free

Unknown Speaker  2:15:00  
package program. It means going in and asking questions. And it's engaging. Some people they want to show I want to get started, started going into volunteer for someone else's program, get in the facility and go through the processes and listen to the students. Listen to the men and women in there, ask questions.

Unknown Speaker  2:15:21  
Gather the culture of that place, so that once you design your program, it isn't far from the students and the students who are actually in those places in those facilities. So that you actually make something that doesn't create another barrier for them while they're trying to survive incarceration, weather trying to excel in a in a place that

Unknown Speaker  2:15:47  
you know, place that is not conducive for survival. And I guess I'll pass with that so that we can keep the conversations going.

Unknown Speaker  2:15:57  
Because I have a lot more to say but will will

Unknown Speaker  2:16:00  
Get back to me. But that's how what I, what I was saying in universities over persuaded for diversity of students. Yes, you you've been describing like about building a college inside official, what do you think universities and colleges have? Oh, people who are coming home from prison, right? So thank you. What they owe is that clear pathway to complete a degree because obviously, it is overwhelming how many students do not actually complete their degree program while incarcerated. So while you're thinking of bringing in, I'm just going to continue in prison and you haven't thought through that process of how will they get on campus? Will they be allowed on campus? Have you thought about housing? Have you thought about the fact that a lot of places will not house students, people who have a criminal record, have you got any of those processes don't bring in a program that will actually create more hardship for that student trying to re enter in the back end. It requires a lot more thought, critical thought and engagement with that community and

Unknown Speaker  2:17:00  
Real degrees, I have a general studies degree from Ball State with some miners, right. And that's a great well and good. But I had a huge update, because I received a general degree and nothing with a specialization. So I had to go out here and do a lot of educational myself to get up to the park to go further with my education. So offer real degree programs that actually are meeting an actual need of the community.

Unknown Speaker  2:17:34  
I just want to talk about teaching inside of prisons after struggle with my staff in the organization because they operate in a sense of fear. So if you're going to go inside a prison, you can't be fearful of the program getting shut down. You can't be fearful of getting kicked out. You have to operate in a sense of you don't care if that happens because if you become sad and you become complacent

Unknown Speaker  2:18:00  
You're really not doing a service to your students. And then you become a part of the system. I'm an advocate, through and through by nature, actually, at every, you know, parole, hearing somebody from our organization goals to support women. And I had the person actually tell me because we run a college improvement program within a university in the facility, that we could not go to the hammer, because by extension, where the partner deals

Unknown Speaker  2:18:30  
so I looked at her, and you know, I told her I was like, excellently mad, I don't care what you say, and sound, my paycheck, the Department of correction, I will never be a part of the Department of correction. So I don't know why you think these institutions have a lot of autonomy. So I call up the Secretary of Public Safety in corrections and I say, hey, look, this is what's going on. He was like, she can't tell you there. So even if you don't

Unknown Speaker  2:19:00  
challenge or push back on the type of education in the positive education that you want to provide these students, you, by extension do become a part of the Department of correction, and reinforcing the same oppressive

Unknown Speaker  2:19:14  
being that individuals have to face while they're incarcerated. So I just want to caution you to if you don't have the stomach to push back, then you should send someone else and you should stay in the office and just create a career. Absolutely, absolutely. Absolutely. And those programs, department corrections, they have various and say, Oh, you're coming into the facility, you can't interact with that student after that person gets out. And you need to make sure that your program has once that person who never goes into a facility who never goes in the village, you'll say, Okay, I've got that covered. You know, Katie, Jake's contact person when that person comes home and make sure that that continuity, that experience for that student is present.

Unknown Speaker  2:19:55  
So, yes, I'm going to ask you now

Unknown Speaker  2:20:01  
Cathy is the mother of this stage.

Unknown Speaker  2:20:05  
So the question I have to Kathy is, how do you see colleges and universities as sites for movement building to end mass incarceration.

Unknown Speaker  2:20:16  
Importantly, my political life began in the 60s, maybe the 50s, actually, but in the in the 60s and 70s, and continued on. And

Unknown Speaker  2:20:27  
I saw the role of students as sort of a faculty and playing a role in this country, to end the war in Vietnam, to build the civil rights movement to support the black liberation movement to build the anti apartheid movement. And I was really encouraged. I was I was came home from prison. I spent four or five years working in a hospital building program for people coming home from prison, and then getting caught furthering my education. But I tried to think about what I really want to do and I had a vision based on my experience, how come

Unknown Speaker  2:21:00  
involve a campus, whether it's college university, and being part of ending the mass incarceration system. And that just doesn't mean just how many people in prison it means the entire system that we talked about yesterday that has roots throughout the whole community, the communities. And so I went to Columbia with a colleague of mine from prison, we had organized in prison to bring higher education back. And our vision was exactly that. How do we engage students and faculty? How do we have an impact on the administration so that this issue of National Conservation permeates the entire the entire campus? And I think that

Unknown Speaker  2:21:40  
you know, we started with the idea that as people that were formerly incarcerated, and we're looking at 10 years ago, we were going to be open about that. As we went to classes as we began to teach. We taught classes. We went to all the peoples classes, we developed a conference called Beyond the bars, which was had the model of the main

Unknown Speaker  2:22:00  
levels that we believed in, which is University, the knowledge inside of the university is, is only a certain kind of knowledge. But if you're trying to build a movement against mass incarceration, you have to draw a knowledge from people that have experienced it from people that have been organizing around it for decades. And so everything that we did was to bring people in who are either activists, formerly incarcerated, impacted by incarceration in different ways, teaching the classes to be people that actually command the workshops at the conference. And that conference kind of embody our sense of how you build a movement inside the campus.

Unknown Speaker  2:22:40  
we've, we've done a number of different things. I think there are examples of what can be done. But if you look at the power inside the university is a powerful institution. And I used to think that we would say how can we get universities and colleges to end as a corporation but having struggled with that question,

Unknown Speaker  2:23:00  
If I rather say how do we work to get to to involve people, the faculty, the students administrative to be involved in, because the university itself is an institution that I can't say we can necessarily transform it, or have that as the goal but rather work with people inside. So I think that if I look at the things that we've done inside

Unknown Speaker  2:23:22  
we've done reports report that not just we did, but we worked in collaboration with say, and change the pool policy work on long sentences.

Unknown Speaker  2:23:35  
We didn't just do that we work we work with an organization called rapidly these aging people who visited doing the grassroots work around that, and then with them, organized before with them more than ever before, because they were the people that had the knowledge in a sense, the direct knowledge of doing that. So Lee was talking to prison with a prison when the program where we teaching in three or four different prisons federal as well as state as well.

Unknown Speaker  2:24:00  
Was Rikers Island, faculty and students go in and do the war. We know that that's transformative for them. And that's important. And it's important that they know that they're not just pulling in because they're going to get some knowledge to gain knowledge. And we try to build off of that and bring them into other activities. At the same time we work on the policy issues around higher education in prison are part of the national organization is working on that issue. So we integrate doing the country work with being a force within the policy work.

Unknown Speaker  2:24:30  
Oral History Project, more than an oral history project with women that were part of the project to bring higher education back the Bedford Hills, to elevate the concept that women have also been leaders in challenging. So conservation. We have a women's we have a training institute that's about it's about movement, building and training. None will use the word training but supporting the development of women's leadership right now. To be able to play a major role in all the work of challenge

Unknown Speaker  2:25:00  
The incarceration system. So let's move in building institute that we actually hold. We work with people who are in prison. And when they come home, try to get them to become part of our Center for Justice, and then they became a force on the campus being able to organize. So I think if you look at the possibilities of what can be done, I think they're just really just beginning it seems to me that there's the possibility of a national initiative about working with different campuses all around the country, sharing what they're doing, and possibly having shared national campaigns.

Unknown Speaker  2:25:43  
Alright, so I'm gonna move on an estimated question, which is, do you believe in abolishing the university

Unknown Speaker  2:25:53  
so immediate answers, yes, but we'll get to that in a minute. I want you guys to

Unknown Speaker  2:26:00  
Human beings.

Unknown Speaker  2:26:01  
I feel like it's cold. People are a little quiet. So I'm just gonna ask everybody to stand up.

Unknown Speaker  2:26:13  
So my first question is if you think that in higher education, we do everything currently presently correctly, sit down.

Unknown Speaker  2:26:25  
Okay.

Unknown Speaker  2:26:27  
Okay. In this country if you think that the hospitals treat everybody equally, and we do everything in healthcare correctly Sit down.

Unknown Speaker  2:26:40  
Oh, good. Okay.

Unknown Speaker  2:26:42  
Last question. So the way that we incarcerate and criminalize folks in this country today if we do that perfectly, you can have to see

Unknown Speaker  2:27:01  
Right, this should you live too deep? I just needed that question.

Unknown Speaker  2:27:07  
So what I want you all to just relax right here at this moment is only two people in the room sat down in your critical, deep thinker. So we're not even gonna include

Unknown Speaker  2:27:17  
that we're all started on the same page that we can all agree on this one thing, we can agree on anything else we can agree on how we're going to make this happen. We can all agree that we don't do these things perfectly right. Okay.

Unknown Speaker  2:27:35  
So, I often started that, talking about how our system in this country were really built or derived or thought about in Benjamin Franklin delivered right before he was an abolitionist. So the oldest university one of the oldest universities, the oldest prison, the oldest hospital, Benjamin Franklin had direct design and all of these things.

Unknown Speaker  2:28:00  
Did we know that this is true? a white man prior to becoming an evolution, becoming a part of the abolitionist movement, build these systems? How can we take that we can change the system?

Unknown Speaker  2:28:15  
You can? And it's no right or wrong. It's no, you know, this is what I believe what I don't believe that we start at that basic premise. We can all agree that these systems, hospitals, prisons, and universities were built and founded to treat, educate and imprison white men. That didn't include women that didn't include black men include any valuable, right and that's just a basic fact that we're starting with. So if we believe these things, then we know that we can transform or reinvent or recreate systems that were never designed for us.

Unknown Speaker  2:28:54  
Right, and then to even take it a step further.

Unknown Speaker  2:28:59  
I'm not going to say that

Unknown Speaker  2:29:00  
A blanket statement, but I'm pretty sure a lot of the white men are kind of different as well. So these white men that they were building to treat and educate and imprison are kind of different. Some are exactly the same, maybe about 20% or so. But just thinking about that, even in its basic premise, it's that we have to not recreate systems, but we have to design things in the way that we see them today. And what is here today, I heard someone earlier talk about not mentioning that Native Americans and queer folks and things of that sort. But for me, it's always about being inclusive of everybody. We work with transgender women. You know, in Louisiana, we're in the south. And I think that people really don't understand how the systems in the south still completely. They're not replicas, they're still standing institutions from when slavery first was created and started in this country. And he said,

Unknown Speaker  2:30:00  
Let them have change, they're still standing still there, the roots are here. And if we don't decide that we need to come from a different place and perspective, we're going to have the same problems we're gonna keep trying to fix and recreating systems. So when I said yes, I feel that we should abolish the university, preferably the way that universities, hospitals, and prisons are ranked created in function I think we have about job systems, but they resemble each other.

Unknown Speaker  2:30:29  
So until we get to a place where we're really able to understand and really be honest with ourselves and say all of these systems are the exact same ages, do different things, you know, the gold standards that we talked about best practices that we talked about, all of those things are rooted in white supremacy. Those were gold standards for white men. Those were best practices for life and we will never live up to those best practices after our gold standards ever. There's a week

Unknown Speaker  2:31:00  
Why when we show up in certain places, and we do certain things, and I heard a woman mentioned earlier, like there was always a list. There's going to continue to be a list. If you keep trying to put people into system that were not created for them, the list will always exclude and change. People were taught in this country that in order for us to be heard, I know for me when I was released from prison, the only reason I went to college is because I felt like I needed letters behind my name for someone to listen to me.

Unknown Speaker  2:31:31  
When you come in, and we talk about equity, I am a nerd.

Unknown Speaker  2:31:37  
In my heart, I love to read. I'm a clinical laboratory scientist, I love looking in the microscope.

Unknown Speaker  2:31:44  
I was applying to go to medical school before I started the organization after 10 years in prison. But what I realized was, was that no matter how many letters I got, the matter what was going on, no matter how many countries and stages as we go on record,

Unknown Speaker  2:32:00  
I can walk off the stage and somebody will say to me, oh my god, you are so articulate and you deliver the message in such a non threatening manner.

Unknown Speaker  2:32:09  
And it comes from black people. And

Unknown Speaker  2:32:12  
it's not just synonymous on race. So what I understood at that moment was it had nothing to do with how many accomplishments I had. It had nothing to do with how far in life I got, no matter how many lives in the hospital, I say,

Unknown Speaker  2:32:27  
I still was going to be looked at as someone who went to prison that was first. And I had to begin to do the work to change what people saw for people who were incarcerated, not the letter for Hi, my name because I just had to

Unknown Speaker  2:32:41  
empty. And I know that I'm a lot smarter than a lot of people. And I don't need to prove to that and I know I have really creative and innovative ideas that can change things and work on things. And I don't mean to be a part of academia in order to get those things done. So listen

Unknown Speaker  2:33:01  
You guys to think about not reforming current systems inside the universities but completely starting over from scratch. I hate the word system to give me a negative feel that

Unknown Speaker  2:33:13  
any institution, any system

Unknown Speaker  2:33:17  
is not meant to be inclusive.

Unknown Speaker  2:33:26  
I guess my question is, when I think about building involving on the campus building a resistance movement to end mass incarceration, it seems to me that one of the amenas is trying to create within the university and their compliance with frustration, and that means the question of everything from

Unknown Speaker  2:33:51  
admissions, taking the box off

Unknown Speaker  2:33:55  
scholarship scholarships, changing the curriculum, inside

Unknown Speaker  2:34:00  
Working on campus security.

Unknown Speaker  2:34:03  
So when you say struggle with reforming? I'm wondering, I know that you've done a lot of work on trying to get the box removed. How do you put together kind of on the one hand, the position of not reforming it or the other and actually trying to involve change inside University around the issue of isolation so that it's no longer will be totally compliant with it.

Unknown Speaker  2:34:27  
So everything that I do is to relieve the suffering of my sisters that are on the inside. But my long term goal is

Unknown Speaker  2:34:37  
I'm not one of those people that feel that can have to be all or nothing because I go into the prison regularly. I'm in the prisons at least twice a week.

Unknown Speaker  2:34:46  
Sometimes, you know, I'm looking at these women in their group fighting for basic necessities. So it's like, wow, we're trying to provide education. We're also passing legislation that regulates not charging people for sanitary

Unknown Speaker  2:35:00  
tampons and telephone calls and making sure people have visitation. So it's not even just about universities becoming compliant. One thing that was really in practice with our college and through the program with Lynn was that these women had to be able to walk out of prison and walk on the campus. Because a lot of these colleges universities go into prison. And they teach classes and they offer degree granting programs. But then when the students get out, they can't even go to the university.

Unknown Speaker  2:35:29  
And if I can't go to the university that was teaching me while I was incarcerated, that is also that's wrong. It's not right. It's also predatory. It's not just predatory from, you know, providing that quality education it's predatory that I can't even complete my degree on your campus. And then the other part of that is is like everything in the end. You're probably gonna look at me like I'm crazy when I say this, but everything that we have ever been taught from the

Unknown Speaker  2:36:01  
Religion is whatever they are like, like the ship is Amita.

Unknown Speaker  2:36:05  
Somebody wrote down and said, This is what I'm going to feed the masses and we're going to sell it like this is what it has to be. And we have been taught this shit over and over and over again until you don't even realize that it was make up the heavens did not open

Unknown Speaker  2:36:25  
on the ground and say this is how you operate as a human being in a country. Now what happened? people to find the founder

Unknown Speaker  2:36:32  
before what happened, it was just somebody wrote in and we taught, and we said this is what it is. So if we rethink our you know, I hate saying reimagine, but if you think about it in those ways is like, nothing that you do nothing makes you think nothing that you say, has to be inside of this box, like the last. The thought process that you even have to ask somebody about their criminal history to go through

Unknown Speaker  2:37:00  
College is not a legal requirement.

Unknown Speaker  2:37:06  
It was a thought leader. So we just thought there.

Unknown Speaker  2:37:14  
So as

Unknown Speaker  2:37:16  
I'm going to ask you a question, how is teaching into prison feminist evidence?

Unknown Speaker  2:37:25  
Thanks for that question.

Unknown Speaker  2:37:29  
In this moment where I think that you've seen the resurgence of prison education programs around the country, people know 1994 a lot of prison education programs were dismantled when in the crime bill, Pell grants were funding for Pell grants were discontinued. And over the last, you know, couple of decades, slowly seeing prison education programs being rebuilt and then in this moment, I think we really see a resurgence of Christian education programs.

Unknown Speaker  2:38:00  
So I think that we really need to really interrogate what it is that we're doing on the go and teach inside. A little bit of background I teach with teaching collective called the prison neighborhood arts project. We're not a traditional education program that is a status symbol University. Ego. Were Consortium, really a collective of educators from the Chicago area. We have partnered with Northeastern Illinois University, University without walls degree granting programs so that we can we can offer students some of the students

Unknown Speaker  2:38:40  
college degrees.

Unknown Speaker  2:38:42  
But I think that

Unknown Speaker  2:38:46  
that really going inside and teaching really offers an opportunity to,

Unknown Speaker  2:38:55  
to it really offers an opportunity to be a vehicle to build

Unknown Speaker  2:39:00  
community with people who are exotic. So Eric Lachman who is here. He was a student that took prison neighborhood arts classes when he was inside. And he said that,

Unknown Speaker  2:39:15  
that there is a different kind of love a different kind of hope and a different kind of dream that people inside, develop, invoke, in order to survive the prison. So I really think that we need to ask ourselves, how are we shining a light on that? How are we actually building community with people who are inside of the building side? And when we teach it that we need to ask ourselves, you know, what are we doing to be advocates? for people, most of our students are contented to die in prison for maximum security prison, so they're serving life sentences, or virtual life sentences on the way is actually one of 16

Unknown Speaker  2:40:00  
The country only has

Unknown Speaker  2:40:03  
if you get a life sentence you are actually sentenced to life without the possibility of parole. So how are we working with people who are inside and embracing people who are inside as our co strugglers and really grateful that we had the opportunity at the beginning of this conference to hear from Stevie Wilson to hear his voice because in grateful to Dan burger for me that possible because, you know, as people with long term sentences are essentially disappeared into the prison it means that too often they're being left out of these kinds of conversations. So we're talking about abolishing prisons, we're talking about,

Unknown Speaker  2:40:50  
you know, ending mass incarceration, but we really need to be talking with people who are inside the, you know, developing strategy, building community

Unknown Speaker  2:41:00  
Able to center the knowledge and experiences that people are inside me one of the things that Stevie's that is that is that he didn't appeal to everyone who is here. And I want to kind of underline that, that appeal that if you're doing work around, for instance, if you're doing work around mastery perseveration you really need to be connected with someone who is currently incarcerated. And I think that that is a charge that universities need to be thinking about, like, you know, and all of us who are doing this kind of work, how are we connected? You know, each one of us to people

Unknown Speaker  2:41:37  
who are inside, how do we think about how do we bring we had a conference

Unknown Speaker  2:41:43  
last month in Illinois, there was a convening on higher education, only white person and one of the things we did ask the thought

Unknown Speaker  2:41:54  
we asked that I needed to see they were invited to participate

Unknown Speaker  2:42:00  
The conference because we are talking, we have a new administration, that is the head of the Illinois Department of Corrections. And, you know, we really want to change the kinds of policies that they have forced upon all of our prison education programs. And we were able to have, you know, three students from state they'll participate in the conference, the video conference, and that changed

Unknown Speaker  2:42:27  
everything to be hearing from JoJo, what we actually need in our educational programs today, it changed it just it made, made the kinds of policies that we were discussing, not something that was, you know,

Unknown Speaker  2:42:42  
not something that was apart from and separate from people very much inclusive of

Unknown Speaker  2:42:51  
the needs and demands of people inside. So I think that we need to think of this work and do this work with

Unknown Speaker  2:43:00  
feminist abolitionists lens. And that I think that what that means is really challenging what our practices are. So when Serena says, okay, you know, are we becoming complicit with a system that is really designed to rape people? You know, how can we make our classrooms actually spaces where that fly in the face of that where people can debate, debate ideas, think strategically with one another, create art, make art, you know, design these new systems that that we want to see. So, I think using that land is the challenge that I think that we need to, to really be thinking about.

Unknown Speaker  2:43:52  
So you're talking about an established

Unknown Speaker  2:44:01  
Can you expound a little bit more on how that film was working with the

Unknown Speaker  2:44:12  
so how, how are they?

Unknown Speaker  2:44:15  
How are you sharing that?

Unknown Speaker  2:44:22  
Well, what we do, I mean, what one of the things that we're doing is trying to bring these kinds of conversations into the classrooms and into the present. So I think it's

Unknown Speaker  2:44:37  
one one thing that I've done is to work with some of my fellow educators to design a think tank. So as opposed to a traditional classroom or a 14 week or 16 week course, is being taught in

Unknown Speaker  2:44:57  
a space that we really think to

Unknown Speaker  2:45:00  
So we feminist abolitionists,

Unknown Speaker  2:45:05  
bringing you know Dean spade into the think tank, we use Maryam Kaabah lifted out the four questions that we need to be asking ourselves about the kinds of campaigns and reform efforts that we're involved in. We're actually bringing, thinking about those kinds of questions. So I think it's about raising many of our students now, do you think of themselves as feminists and abolitionists? We're asking ourselves the question of, you know, is parole, an extension of the carceral state? And so I think for us, it's really about, you know, how do we use that lens and then also understanding, you know, the contradiction of, you know, feminism.

Unknown Speaker  2:45:50  
That is that our work is so very much

Unknown Speaker  2:45:55  
about people who the state we're working with and teaching in a place

Unknown Speaker  2:46:00  
with people who the state defined as met, right, and so, you know, there are contradictions to that. But I think about how do we how do we bring these words into the

Unknown Speaker  2:46:16  
question? So in light of what Alex is talking about, and in light of what you just talked about, about dismantling institutions,

Unknown Speaker  2:46:27  
in the reimagining of what education looks like, for us, what's that look like?

Unknown Speaker  2:46:34  
I think that we are ready to do some things correctly, when you allow students to design their courses.

Unknown Speaker  2:46:41  
We will allow the student to decide what it is that they want to study. Currently, I think that the incarcerated population is interesting class oriented, you know, people in general, is the one population where everybody else knows what's best for them.

Unknown Speaker  2:47:00  
You know, people come in and they tell people, this is what I think that you need to do in order for you to make it at either or to be smart, or, you know, re entered successfully. You know, not perspectives always lie. I had one that I was in conversation with. He was I, I could tell you how to stay out of prison. It was a conversation with a woman who worked the reentry program at Arkansas. And she was like, Well, I can teach them how to stay out of prison. I was like, how can you teach them this data for them with a felony conviction? You know, that she was like, Oh, well hadn't thought about it that way. I'm like, No, you don't, because you don't have that experience. And it's not to say that there's not a place for government. And it's not a place for people to talk about experiences, because we all have experiences, but nobody knows what it felt like for me to be a President 19 prior to the democratic

Unknown Speaker  2:47:55  
you know, technology post. Well, pre Katrina, you know,

Unknown Speaker  2:48:00  
Went to recruit train and outpost the trainer, and everything that I thought that was going to anchor meetup community, how I was going to be able to, you know, read it searches didn't exist that wasn't there. I went out looking for McKinsey.

Unknown Speaker  2:48:13  
And try it with love McKinsey, and triangle, the best in the world right?

Unknown Speaker  2:48:20  
Now got out and I'm ready with looking for these things that ground me and we'll be back in my community and they did not exist. And the only plan that I had was that I was going to be able to go to college to further my education. So that felt like education could be my salvation. Right? The first five years of prison I had been in six institutions because I had a longer sentence and I didn't have access to education. But the minute I started taking college courses, I felt like something. I became more analytical. I found out what made me tick, what I could resist learning about who I was as an individual, and then that got out because I had this great plan for myself. And that wasn't even available.

Unknown Speaker  2:49:00  
sold the isolation and the grief that I felt not even being able to communicate with my family that I left behind in prison, and to be placed in this world to look like what I thought it should look like. And people telling me that I have to function. technology was extremely hard. And I feel like the only people that can tell me how to navigate that situation was the other women who had the same experience, because they would know that I don't like going in the mall because it's bad thousand people. And for the past 10 years forgot more people gathered together to be considered inside. They didn't look at me crazy when I didn't want to go to the grocery store and just say, Hey, give me a list. When I go to the grocery store, I'm going to get your groceries for you. It was not even happens. Explain why I did not belong I feel connected was the best thing for me. And it's like we all have well meaning intentions. But if you don't have a particular experience

Unknown Speaker  2:50:00  
You should be supportive. You shouldn't be leading the way. And that's an imaging that goes on. So for me, I think that the most important thing that people have to realize when it comes to like the university's leading into the best in class, the reason it should not be they simply have a supportive role. You should be providing space data, the thing that educational institutions do really, really well. That is the thing that you should be leaving out or listening to the ending of mass incarceration and that

Unknown Speaker  2:50:33  
you said that

Unknown Speaker  2:50:36  
I definitely agree that part of the struggle and doing more with the university is for them to his people in the university to recognize that they can't be leading and they shouldn't be. So I really agree with that. I guess my question is, or maybe each of you. Do you think that the issue of ending the carceral state ending mass incarceration is something that students and faculty

Unknown Speaker  2:51:01  
can be are engaged in a lot and can make a difference as a site of real protest and a movement. You think that we only we saw in the portrait film that was amazing yesterday, the role of the students in being part of a larger movement. And we certainly have seen it through the decades throughout the world, really, through all the students and being part of protest movements to change, not just the university, but the change the society. Is this issue, something that we think that students that we can imagine a national movement around on campuses that could happen?

Unknown Speaker  2:51:37  
Would I would say so you have to start with the students with the faculty. We have

Unknown Speaker  2:51:45  
to protect the jobs and positions.

Unknown Speaker  2:51:49  
And so, one of the questions that was asked at another conference was how people have to go back to the play, but one of the roles that you can certainly play is be

Unknown Speaker  2:52:00  
Part of supporting their students when they produce proposals to eliminate discrimination on college mission applications and other campaigns, they're the accurate school. You can, you can provide the weight of your voice behind that. And it will require faculty and students to work together. I mean, there is a non discrimination clause. In every in every single University's policies. There's a title seven EEOC non discrimination clause and there are many, many groups of people who are listed there that universities cannot discriminate against, in, in admissions, employment, etc, etc, are at positions. So there's a lot that faculty can do.

Unknown Speaker  2:52:49  
There's a lot that faculty can do to support students in that work because a non discrimination call clause

Unknown Speaker  2:52:58  
adding incarcerated for

Unknown Speaker  2:53:00  
course for the students

Unknown Speaker  2:53:03  
to that existing policy should already be there, particularly if you're doing any programming inside your university doing programming inside of the prison. And you haven't included incarcerated formerly cursory students in that protections in those legal protections for non discrimination, you are out of line, because what happens is those students can come back come to that campus attend to be enrolled attend to. And if they are happy to get enrolled, move into our position take position as suddenly they're discriminated against because of formerly incarcerated.

Unknown Speaker  2:53:38  
Think ahead and recognize that there are provisions that you can put in place values fight that you can be having now to change that public policy. So the students can actually move along in the in the universities, that's what they choose to do, but that would be well without being discriminated and the leadership of that's going to be formally incarcerated people and the students on campus because they have

Unknown Speaker  2:54:00  
ability to they have to work.

Unknown Speaker  2:54:03  
They have the ability to mobilize and organize effectively should help them with those efforts. And then she said that she's ready to take questions from the audience.

Unknown Speaker  2:54:23  
Hi, so our comment coming from South Texas where the conversation of college, you know, classes in prisons, it's not even in the fiction.

Unknown Speaker  2:54:33  
We're barely getting GED programs come into the prison. So it's like how do we even start a conversation in South Texas when you know most of the

Unknown Speaker  2:54:43  
Mexican American second generation first generation we don't even think reward, you know, those classes. So I think is really important to be aware of that where we are, you know, going for a woman You know, there's a high see teenagers

Unknown Speaker  2:55:00  
You know, the money that we can fairly good companies going towards, you know, helping those who want to get, you know,

Unknown Speaker  2:55:08  
doctors and stuff, we don't even get any GED programs, you know, we don't

Unknown Speaker  2:55:12  
this is almost like running a deeper work, you know, the higher education and, and I believe knowledge is power and, and I agree with you that, you know, having letters behind names doesn't define who I am what my people are not even there, you know, I just want people to be aware of that.

Unknown Speaker  2:55:32  
South Texas, Louisiana is kind of 71 the only college improvement program that really existed Louisiana, founder of the Baptist Theological Seminary, and it was designed for people with life sentences to become ministers in prison. That was the sole focus and that was really the only education that those individual kept for really long time. But thinking about how you can go outside of the box and partner

Unknown Speaker  2:56:00  
With organization so the model that we have is there. In our nonprofit, we hold all of the money we participate in drafting curriculum, we interview the professors we pay the professors into line does what it does really well. It gives us solution waivers. It does student transcripts, and make sure that the credits are into so fat and that how you can get creative partnerships. And what it is that you can leverage to bring to the table to get the education to the people that want to have it. So I can definitely tell you start there. At the event, we can talk, you know, I'll give you my card, and we can just bring something because I think also people don't realize how different the South is. And when we sit on stage and talk about the north in the West Coast and the East Coast. We don't realize that in the south. It's just very different. So

Unknown Speaker  2:57:09  
Okay, so we talked a little bit about banning.

Unknown Speaker  2:57:14  
I was curious about whether or not there was any concern about

Unknown Speaker  2:57:17  
universities who cannot ask for applicants had been incarcerated, responded to that by just assuming that all their black applicants have been incarcerated, and then treating them as such.

Unknown Speaker  2:57:33  
Hi, thank you so much for being here. And my question might be seen as a little frivolous, but I'm a professor of dance and movement, very interested in bringing that into the prisons and working with incarcerated all genders. Everyone often says, Oh, this is for women. Now this is for all genders and we don't have to somebody can become, we can't use ourselves fully physically as you made a stand up earlier. So I'm wondering about some advice about having a

Unknown Speaker  2:58:00  
a program like that into universities or into into the incarcerated for people and credit because people don't see that as essential. It's not now it's not history. It's not English. It's seen as extracurricular, often, I think.

Unknown Speaker  2:58:21  
So Kathy, you talked about the university's compliance with the carceral state, but I'm wondering if we can also think through a little bit how we dress, universities roles and as actual evidence of incarceration as well and active players in that process. So on my campus four years ago, the campus police arrested an African American undergraduate, for jumping the turnstile at Campus gym, and he spent the rest of the school year in county jail

Unknown Speaker  2:58:48  
trigger violation. And I imagine that folks in this room probably have similar stories. So I'm wondering, you know, we've been talking about these institutions fairly compartmentalizes

Unknown Speaker  2:59:00  
But like you said, Sweden, they are part of the system and how do we address that and address?

Unknown Speaker  2:59:12  
So, just a question about the Big Bang.

Unknown Speaker  2:59:17  
go from there. I think that

Unknown Speaker  2:59:22  
men in the box is often not enough, right? Because they are often there are other ways in which to determine if a person is fully incarcerated. And what we have seen is that even credit checks are being used to determine because if someone has

Unknown Speaker  2:59:41  
any type of liens left on their account, reparations, court case, feasible fees that have not been paid, they'll show up on their credit checks. And so we have to be we have to be vigilant about changing the social, that social consequences

Unknown Speaker  3:00:00  
As opposed to rely on whether or not the boxes checked, because of someone wants to criminalize a we criminalize person for having been involved in the criminal justice system, they'll find a way to do it through these bureaucratic systems through these carceral agents who find ways to criminalize and re criminalize formerly incarcerated people in perpetuity. So my suggestion to that work is, is that we must truly get to a place where we are

Unknown Speaker  3:00:30  
looking more at those in to actions or social consequences of those social every single day interactions that people have with one another. And when you do a check, it's not about the incarcerated person, according to a person needing to make themselves pretty enough worthy enough, shiny enough to be given an opportunity. It's for the observer, the person outside into a check, to do a check on themselves because those people have done whatever they've done.

Unknown Speaker  3:01:00  
Receive whatever servers receive, they're done. And so if you need to take recompilation equalization out into perpetuity against this person, for whatever reason for the past, you're out of line. And so we need to speak up against that, as administrators faculties, as as students who are in these schools and you see it happening, call it out is and push back against that, because those collateral consequences are the ones that we don't always see. We can't always calculate their qualitative. We can't wrap them all and, and quiet, every single one of us to make it a personal responsibility. All of us all, you know, everybody to check ourselves on those constant social consequences that will be extracted from relational people. It's a personal thing. It's an individual thing, and we're all accountable for that.

Unknown Speaker  3:01:55  
I just want to answer them in the box thing. The inbox ontology

Unknown Speaker  3:02:00  
occasions that have been applications are two totally different things. Now multiple studies to say that those two things are not connected. But I know in my particular case, I use the same application didn't change any demographic information. The only thing I did was uncheck the box on the electronic application. And I was a kid with scholarship. And my name is Barry estimate, get Serega. So you know, either you're going to think that I'm black from Spanish or something of the sort where, you know,

Unknown Speaker  3:02:28  
most of the time you're making an assumption like which demographic that are linked to the way that college applications are set up, which I found out later was electronically, when people fill out applications, they're not one person is going through all of the application is electronically moved to the side to say, you can check this box, you automatically go here and if you don't take this back, she automatically go to the right. So for me, I think that argument that other folks I use it is that they are the same, but you don't admit people based on the name

Unknown Speaker  3:03:00  
On the application install University, I've been a part of a work environment where people are going to select the check the box that now will discriminate against people based on our family, my construction company, and the actual person who's doing the hiring would be like, I can't even pronounce his name. It's going here. I don't have that they must be Spanish, they're going to work really hard. So that was how the assorted applications for education is different. And I don't I hate when people confuse the two, because you're good at this service with removing the backs off of college applications, because that the determining factor that some universities when I applied to med school, historically black college, Morehouse wrote back and said we do not allow anybody who has a felony conviction. That was the response. They took my hundred dollars. They didn't look at my application.

Unknown Speaker  3:03:54  
You know, soft cotton said I don't want to be affiliated with a university that does not you know, believe in second chances but you

Unknown Speaker  3:04:00  
need to put a disclaimer on your website to say do not apply here if you have a felony conviction. So we know that there's the regular discrimination on admissions application specifically around the box

Unknown Speaker  3:04:14  
around the box and related to

Unknown Speaker  3:04:16  
employment situations where people don't sign a box where they buy, but once they get past a certain point and they're conditionally offered a job, then the background checks will lead them to

Unknown Speaker  3:04:30  
possibly not be accepted. And I think that is one of the areas in employment that really matters to develop, develop consciousness about this and develop with 20 people who are applying for a job with chroma

Unknown Speaker  3:04:46  
key area, which the education of whether students are mainly faculty to be a force to make ends meet, be able to be hired and protesting

Unknown Speaker  3:05:00  
One thing, I think it turns to university being compliant with mass incarceration support us. There's no question that that's why I think we have to talk about the university itself is a powerful institution that does align itself with the forces. We've seen this, certainly at many universities. They're always located here, but there's no security situation. On one hand, they're expanding into the communities around them, and taking away neighborhoods and destroyed neighborhoods with people live, on the other hand, using campus security, as a exhilarate, to the police force, and dealing with in mainly in terms of people call it racism that leads them to rescue and be suspicious of people. And I think that, again, it's another area in which we have to say it has to be a mobilization around the bill, the criticism of students in particular, that can deal with those things, which is why I think it's not a question of the university outside and inside and

Unknown Speaker  3:06:01  
So,

Unknown Speaker  3:06:03  
when I look at the question of the institution, as a university, I think that we have to say, in what way can students in particular faculty, be mobilized or mobilize themselves to be part of this growing movement that sees the university?

Unknown Speaker  3:06:22  
We were just respond to the question about dance and performance inside me. I know that for our our students actually want more dance and performance kinds of classes. They want to be able to be creative. And we did teach, we had someone come in who was a performance artist to taught classes in dance and movement. And I know that for the students who took that class, it was incredibly transformative, because you know, people who are basically locked up in a cage don't have that opportunity to

Unknown Speaker  3:07:00  
Think about their body and the way that this instructor actually taught. It's really a way of thinking about your own body and being comfortable in your own skin. And at state. Well, at the end of every semester, we do have these end of semester celebrations where students from the class have an opportunity to say some words about the class that they just took part in. And the students in that class actually choreographed and performed a routine at the, at the celebration at the ceremony. And I think that those kinds of things can be really transformative.

Unknown Speaker  3:07:39  
I just think really, for me, it asked the question

Unknown Speaker  3:07:45  
speaks to a different question, which is to not allow ourselves to take on the logic of the prison when we're thinking about the kinds of classes that you want to have inside and to really think expansive

Unknown Speaker  3:08:00  
about those classes and to offer those classes, and sometimes that that means we didn't call it a dance class, we call it a movement class. Right? So just thinking strategically about, well, how do you bring, bring these things into the present, but not letting the carceral logic inhibit what we what the possibilities can be.

Unknown Speaker  3:08:24  
So we've had such great questions, but unfortunately, we do need to wrap up this panel. So we can't take any more questions at this time. But we do thank you all. And please give a hand to our panelists.

Unknown Speaker  3:09:32  
I hope we get a moment to chat just a bit and women are

Unknown Speaker  3:09:37  
very easily East exchange Asia

Unknown Speaker  3:09:42  
okay

Unknown Speaker  3:09:44  
same place

Unknown Speaker  3:11:39  
You're not

Unknown Speaker  3:11:43  
going

Unknown Speaker  3:11:49  
to see

Unknown Speaker  3:11:55  
more

Unknown Speaker  3:12:25  
Seems

Unknown Speaker  3:12:28  
like

Unknown Speaker  3:12:33  
because of my question about conceptualizing the year

Unknown Speaker  3:14:59  
You

Unknown Speaker  3:15:08  
We

Unknown Speaker  3:15:11  
already kind of crazy

Unknown Speaker  3:16:33  
So when you think about that in

Unknown Speaker  3:16:37  
my household

Unknown Speaker  3:16:40  
financial fighting models are them but we're here because

Unknown Speaker  3:16:47  
this was an inspiring our end.

Unknown Speaker  3:16:51  
Yeah do that because it could be that it doesn't all we need to do to this happening

Unknown Speaker  3:16:57  
intubating

Unknown Speaker  3:17:03  
He doesn't project your project and

Unknown Speaker  3:17:07  
I know sometimes poking and prodding

Unknown Speaker  3:17:12  
to do it at the heart of it. I created to get your accolades

Unknown Speaker  3:17:18  
to that profits.

Unknown Speaker  3:17:22  
So I've had to be working to grab on all the

Unknown Speaker  3:17:27  
chandeliers and

Unknown Speaker  3:17:30  
everything right and go

Unknown Speaker  3:17:34  
into our office

Unknown Speaker  3:17:38  
following happens to be

Unknown Speaker  3:17:41  
a real world

Unknown Speaker  3:17:52  
project

Unknown Speaker  3:17:56  
until maybe there's that that can come out for

Unknown Speaker  3:18:03  
And one of them important,

Unknown Speaker  3:18:06  
not being afraid of

Unknown Speaker  3:18:09  
amazing work.

Unknown Speaker  3:18:11  
You know?

Unknown Speaker  3:18:13  
Yeah, and this is a condition but I really think in some programs they think they're looking so hard into so hard

Unknown Speaker  3:18:26  
and we are going to talk with her about falling down.

Unknown Speaker  3:18:31  
Right and you don't have to. You don't have to

Unknown Speaker  3:18:36  
know what they know what worries away.

Unknown Speaker  3:18:42  
It might not be like, Oh, no, the climate is awesome.

Unknown Speaker  3:18:54  
Please add

Unknown Speaker  3:18:57  
it here. I've just added this. So I'm just basically like a movie like

Unknown Speaker  3:19:00  
Except that we are here because they're doing this, right. So that's a really great way.

Unknown Speaker  3:19:07  
idea.

Unknown Speaker  3:19:09  
You are drawing. They are great to know and hopefully together This is one right? It's getting ready to do it.

Unknown Speaker  3:19:21  
I have I have you all because things are happening, but what was on

Unknown Speaker  3:19:28  
my mind

Unknown Speaker  3:19:34  
I kind of had

Unknown Speaker  3:19:37  
the idea

Unknown Speaker  3:19:51  
that your

Unknown Speaker  3:19:53  
kind words means

Unknown Speaker  3:19:56  
feel like we're

Unknown Speaker  3:19:59  
mixing

Unknown Speaker  3:20:01  
New

Unknown Speaker  3:20:18  
York

Unknown Speaker  3:20:24  
I'm going to be my mentor. I

Unknown Speaker  3:20:31  
am worried about like how many people have this in mind that the reason why

Unknown Speaker  3:20:36  
I can have it be like a

Unknown Speaker  3:20:43  
new cycle so you might want to see because I hate getting off the stage

Unknown Speaker  3:20:53  
or another

Unknown Speaker  3:20:57  
and then everybody my

Unknown Speaker  3:21:00  
Have a conversation that you're having

Unknown Speaker  3:21:10  
and then also an area rather comments about the fight against all the odds are stacked against you and

Unknown Speaker  3:21:20  
the Dynamo

Unknown Speaker  3:21:26  
talk a little bit about that nation so like that's another place where you can grow up

Unknown Speaker  3:21:38  
everyone's

Unknown Speaker  3:21:42  
heart because I heard Linda time Well, we so the way I'm waiting out

Unknown Speaker  3:21:49  
is we will start this conversation right around

Unknown Speaker  3:21:58  
work off of each other's minds.

Unknown Speaker  3:22:00  
Wrap it up

Unknown Speaker  3:22:09  
and then in a certain

Unknown Speaker  3:22:19  
way

Unknown Speaker  3:22:37  
changes

Unknown Speaker  3:22:42  
I would love to hear

Unknown Speaker  3:23:31  
Make sure we

Unknown Speaker  3:23:34  
all have a if we have to change

Unknown Speaker  3:23:41  
and I can have my computer

Unknown Speaker  3:24:02  
Right

Unknown Speaker  3:24:12  
here

Unknown Speaker  3:24:28  
either way,

Unknown Speaker  3:24:51  
no that's not to say

Unknown Speaker  3:24:57  
I know that you will I know that everybody can

Unknown Speaker  3:25:00  
Great right not too much about this maybe organizing but

Unknown Speaker  3:25:08  
right now talk to me I already

Unknown Speaker  3:25:12  
in person and the dive in and of itself the conceptualization of that reason period

Unknown Speaker  3:25:33  
like music

Unknown Speaker  3:26:10  
Are you real?

Unknown Speaker  3:26:19  
are so good?

Unknown Speaker  3:26:33  
You want to bring in any money

Unknown Speaker  3:26:43  
What did you

Unknown Speaker  3:26:44  
like

Unknown Speaker  3:26:46  
about how economic

Unknown Speaker  3:26:50  
process

Unknown Speaker  3:26:52  
anytime created?

Unknown Speaker  3:26:56  
Ja Ja. Any music? Yes and he has a university

Unknown Speaker  3:27:02  
because nobody's going

Unknown Speaker  3:27:10  
to

Unknown Speaker  3:27:12  
play a part of me so

Unknown Speaker  3:27:14  
he's certainly

Unknown Speaker  3:27:19  
he was.

Unknown Speaker  3:27:24  
So I decided to kind of talk a little bit about disability under

Unknown Speaker  3:27:32  
the Americans, simply because I feel like I'm working

Unknown Speaker  3:27:39  
on art, so I don't need to

Unknown Speaker  3:27:44  
build on them obviously. I feel like you have a lot to say. beyond that.

Unknown Speaker  3:27:50  
I think

Unknown Speaker  3:27:53  
everyone

Unknown Speaker  3:27:57  
thinking about finding

Unknown Speaker  3:28:03  
Okay, how can I lay the land? Yeah, basically it's fine to allow certain bodies. Yes, you can gain knowledge. Yeah, as opposed to be not experienced

Unknown Speaker  3:28:16  
when you're when you're talking about legal a,

Unknown Speaker  3:28:21  
not just me personally, I think we will

Unknown Speaker  3:28:30  
not be

Unknown Speaker  3:28:32  
insulted.

Unknown Speaker  3:28:35  
Sometimes

Unknown Speaker  3:28:37  
junction or number that become Muslim

Unknown Speaker  3:28:43  
institutions that much more leeway and power to targets

Unknown Speaker  3:29:29  
Let's

Unknown Speaker  3:29:31  
get

Unknown Speaker  3:29:36  
our time

Unknown Speaker  3:29:38  
society

Unknown Speaker  3:29:43  
guess what he just friends

Unknown Speaker  3:29:50  
you know we have to be institutionalized. We want to keep people behind bars in the more than a year we're going to put them out on the streets. No, that's not what happened.

Unknown Speaker  3:30:08  
These conversations we have quite

Unknown Speaker  3:30:22  
starting just shifting into

Unknown Speaker  3:30:29  
what you're doing now.

Unknown Speaker  3:30:38  
Yeah, I got

Unknown Speaker  3:30:52  
I got a

Unknown Speaker  3:30:53  
novel you were wear

Unknown Speaker  3:31:02  
Like you like I didn't really like in this

Unknown Speaker  3:31:16  
talking Why?

Unknown Speaker  3:31:21  
Okay.

Unknown Speaker  3:31:25  
Molly, there is

Unknown Speaker  3:31:28  
your big piece that I like

Unknown Speaker  3:31:53  
time it is what

Unknown Speaker  3:31:59  
it's called

Unknown Speaker  3:32:00  
It

Unknown Speaker  3:32:01  
was all

Unknown Speaker  3:32:06  
about

Unknown Speaker  3:32:07  
Jackie

Unknown Speaker  3:32:12  
I really don't remember that part. Yeah.

Unknown Speaker  3:32:17  
Yeah, right.

Unknown Speaker  3:32:19  
I mean, know when you're down here

Unknown Speaker  3:32:29  
okay.

Unknown Speaker  3:32:32  
All right and then I'm definitely October no board member anything about making the wrong will be drunk

Unknown Speaker  3:32:44  
at

Unknown Speaker  3:32:51  
the level of their false documentary

Unknown Speaker  3:32:55  
documentary documentaries on that

Unknown Speaker  3:33:00  
Next week

Unknown Speaker  3:33:03  
are you

Unknown Speaker  3:33:10  
like I always do

Unknown Speaker  3:33:19  
my best and

Unknown Speaker  3:33:24  
nobody's

Unknown Speaker  3:33:26  
really trying

Unknown Speaker  3:33:28  
to hit those bottles,

Unknown Speaker  3:33:31  
okay?

Unknown Speaker  3:33:40  
teeny tiny Bibles and they're getting in

Unknown Speaker  3:33:43  
touch

Unknown Speaker  3:33:44  
with you

Unknown Speaker  3:33:46  
for honors to the time you know. It's very exciting. Anyway, she was just you know wondering

Unknown Speaker  3:33:55  
all the way

Unknown Speaker  3:34:00  
I swear to God it

Unknown Speaker  3:34:03  
is not good thing.

Unknown Speaker  3:34:06  
I was brand new

Unknown Speaker  3:34:10  
here

Unknown Speaker  3:34:27  
somebody else who wants to me to say major names

Unknown Speaker  3:34:33  
of them but you don't even the name of that door. Yes. You know what alone we have two children who are right about the same time, but really similar

Unknown Speaker  3:34:54  
care guys

Unknown Speaker  3:35:28  
like that but

Unknown Speaker  3:35:32  
like we can do

Unknown Speaker  3:35:35  
it all by myself

Unknown Speaker  3:35:38  
many times here so

Unknown Speaker  3:35:50  
where's the mark on his shoulder

Unknown Speaker  3:36:00  
Monique

Unknown Speaker  3:36:05  
on me. Larry is like whatever this is the girls get in the turnstile like five people in

Unknown Speaker  3:36:16  
the chat and baby

Unknown Speaker  3:36:19  
right? Damn like

Unknown Speaker  3:36:22  
I heard this girl yelling like here and I like immediately was like, oh my name

Unknown Speaker  3:36:29  
starts drinking yeah I couldn't like I started probably like you do it

Unknown Speaker  3:36:38  
I definitely know how

Unknown Speaker  3:36:41  
are you?

Unknown Speaker  3:36:48  
Cow right good

Unknown Speaker  3:36:55  
Molly Patrick

Unknown Speaker  3:37:26  
There wasn't like a lot of like saros or just

Unknown Speaker  3:37:45  
speaking of

Unknown Speaker  3:37:55  
so that somebody thinks that I want my actual identity

Unknown Speaker  3:38:01  
Before we

Unknown Speaker  3:38:03  
make an announcement, I do I am not in a hurry and what I'm doing in my information people like this copy of martial arts without ever talking.

Unknown Speaker  3:38:21  
whatever

Unknown Speaker  3:38:25  
whatever makes you think this is exactly why you do it. Oh, she did that. She did it. I just said

Unknown Speaker  3:38:36  
you

Unknown Speaker  3:38:38  
know, because

Unknown Speaker  3:38:45  
you didn't have an organization

Unknown Speaker  3:38:48  
why I was

Unknown Speaker  3:38:51  
part of the

Unknown Speaker  3:38:53  
email

Unknown Speaker  3:39:06  
right to the heart yes I know that

Unknown Speaker  3:39:11  
her after the fact when I talked to her this was part of the reason I hadn't she

Unknown Speaker  3:39:16  
did because it leaks out there who I who I am and aromatic what's going on the whole security breach of viruses not just idea there is a reason that

Unknown Speaker  3:39:33  
I need I

Unknown Speaker  3:39:36  
need

Unknown Speaker  3:39:38  
this

Unknown Speaker  3:39:44  
is this is so

Unknown Speaker  3:39:48  
this was for me. I said yes it is all I have So writing

Unknown Speaker  3:39:54  
I get a text message and I have

Unknown Speaker  3:39:58  
no yeah, I think

Unknown Speaker  3:40:04  
I don't want

Unknown Speaker  3:40:06  
to do it.

Unknown Speaker  3:40:21  
Your mother's response.

Unknown Speaker  3:40:24  
I said, What? An excellent, yeah, your mom is down and one of the things I know my,

Unknown Speaker  3:40:31  
my brother, one of my sisters

Unknown Speaker  3:40:34  
down, you know to be doing whatever the hell they're doing. Well, for whatever reason, while they've been down there, my husband decides to start all the places that ratings and they find I think tonight or whatever, but listen, I mean it's not it's not anything super extravagant but the woman who owned the house you must have so the entire house has been built as it is.

Unknown Speaker  3:41:00  
All the furnishings in everything. Like they said, you take some shit out of your kitchen cabinet has been like this many.

Unknown Speaker  3:41:09  
So then I'm like, Okay, well, you're missing that. So she tells me I'm like, I'm never gonna see when I come in. I see myself. It's 20 minutes away from where you're at right now what you got? Yes, sir. What is the fucking life? My mother doesn't know anything about this particular play for the lines. Oh, yeah. Yeah.

Unknown Speaker  3:41:35  
It's about 35 PRP Medical Group. Yeah. So yeah. Wow. So

Unknown Speaker  3:41:45  
I now I don't think it's going to be as difficult as I think it's going to be but I started it to start having conversation about transferring the role. And I think you know, sometimes the easiest way to do that and

Unknown Speaker  3:42:00  
have to have to support the analyzable ation trying to go do that are like yeah there's a reason for being here

Unknown Speaker  3:42:10  
yeah

Unknown Speaker  3:42:14  
and maybe you're supposed to be helping you and your guys further develop what the hell is your baby now that's what that's what the gap is happening

Unknown Speaker  3:42:26  
right now

Unknown Speaker  3:42:29  
I don't have that

Unknown Speaker  3:42:31  
right now Do I have been going crazy nights

Unknown Speaker  3:42:36  
I can bring a whole lot of shifts to the table

Unknown Speaker  3:42:42  
and Michelle can back me up do not rely on me for vacation in that regard I didn't

Unknown Speaker  3:42:48  
notice yet right right.

Unknown Speaker  3:42:52  
become like the fire and get the ship started sparking up and take it to the next level and over it today.

Unknown Speaker  3:43:00  
Yo rely on wind up taking

Unknown Speaker  3:43:04  
what is the time frame? Like what are you thinking? Well, I think, you know, it would be ridiculous to leave about why my mom was so dumb. You know, so I'm looking at

Unknown Speaker  3:43:17  
Smash Brothers man I'm looking at as soon as that semester is over that people don't want to

Unknown Speaker  3:43:24  
graduate certification.

Unknown Speaker  3:43:27  
Yeah, so

Unknown Speaker  3:43:31  
yeah, I think I'm going to wait until the program is done. So, I mean, it sounds like we already have links on the deck of world is coming on deck right now in May. So we will be doing

Unknown Speaker  3:43:44  
whatever. You know, I had a crazy few years ago, Elizabeth I told somebody you know, like autumn what's next for you? And I told everybody, I don't know what it's done to figure itself out this year, probably for this to happen. So

Unknown Speaker  3:44:00  
I'm not 100% sure what it's going to look like once I get there but now I know I'm go so we need to strategize and figure out the

Unknown Speaker  3:44:13  
best but yeah, let's wait I can't wait to get the fuck out of here

Unknown Speaker  3:44:18  
like I didn't want to be there and all right now

Unknown Speaker  3:44:22  
yeah I'm like I think my brother said we're like two miles from the beach but the voice like

Unknown Speaker  3:44:28  
I don't know if it's prefab community or what it is but what have

Unknown Speaker  3:44:37  
you have no reason to be building you know but that's not my

Unknown Speaker  3:44:45  
name is Mary there and they want that. Yes

Unknown Speaker  3:44:54  
so it's a conservative area

Unknown Speaker  3:44:57  
not a Go Go to be a hard place

Unknown Speaker  3:45:02  
You don't love it there we love what we're doing is I don't like

Unknown Speaker  3:45:09  
talking the way

Unknown Speaker  3:45:14  
I love the idea that it should be an area right?

Unknown Speaker  3:45:20  
Like this. I mean my goal. My goal for my life is to not necessarily be stationary at

Unknown Speaker  3:45:28  
the dream is to know all of my work and where I'm at on wheels that can go place to place to place place. I continue to do what I do, you know, so but I think it's a great opportunity to give me home base somewhere that's not easy to kind of re establish and restart my life in completely new area, which is what I do at that time.

Unknown Speaker  3:45:53  
You know, I mean, because as the shear is quickly winding down academic and I asked her

Unknown Speaker  3:46:00  
What am I gonna do next? I mean, I've kind of sort of I'm right in the deadline right now to apply for PhD, but I'm undecided. I'm undecided where I want to be and what I want to do. So I feel like if I would have just started doing applications now it's kind of major and on our business methods you like

Unknown Speaker  3:46:21  
so and I don't know much about it.

Unknown Speaker  3:46:24  
So I remember to hire out from Washington.

Unknown Speaker  3:46:32  
I was gonna go to meeting but I'm here until gilina.

Unknown Speaker  3:46:36  
conference for recruiting.

Unknown Speaker  3:46:40  
And they're really excited about them right now, but I know nothing about it. But if you're going to be in the area, I think any brand, right, that's right. Great job. And that's what I'm trying to do. Yeah, yeah, because we are a small program, but we're always looking to find ways to

Unknown Speaker  3:47:00  
So if we could do something where we write a grant together that agencies I contributing to your specific project and evidence about what you want to do, I mean, I would love to come back after you know, so like it was terrible.

Unknown Speaker  3:47:19  
They give us a lot about autonomy.

Unknown Speaker  3:47:22  
So

Unknown Speaker  3:47:26  
they're like a one of the things that we're trying to do is hire one of our kids and get them out and we've gotten grant from college. We want to hire him to account by the way that we had a great time with it.

Unknown Speaker  3:47:38  
In the we're just like working and

Unknown Speaker  3:47:41  
very good.

Unknown Speaker  3:47:45  
So what we're looking to do kind of our perspective, someone who has incarcerated you know, you hire them and they were putting on an independent fine

Unknown Speaker  3:47:55  
but they already came over

Unknown Speaker  3:47:58  
here. No, no

Unknown Speaker  3:48:00  
You already know you can sorcery one more background at

Unknown Speaker  3:48:05  
the conservative point. Yeah. Are you

Unknown Speaker  3:48:11  
know Margo was like, Garrett, you know the livestreams on this one coming up here too late.

Unknown Speaker  3:48:16  
But there's there's like,

Unknown Speaker  3:48:19  
Okay.

Unknown Speaker  3:48:27  
I feel like this is the this is the space where we're broadcasting our shows anyway, so

Unknown Speaker  3:49:04  
750

Unknown Speaker  3:49:22  
our brands want

Unknown Speaker  3:49:27  
us to know who we are. Why don't we make a determination who want to take the next step and PhD

Unknown Speaker  3:49:36  
Julian does that

Unknown Speaker  3:49:45  
kind of

Unknown Speaker  3:49:47  
live

Unknown Speaker  3:49:59  
you're trying to match

Unknown Speaker  3:50:00  
Once you did try that this one switches it down to make right which you know

Unknown Speaker  3:50:05  
nothing personal

Unknown Speaker  3:50:07  
did you do those two those don't seem like they would do it should they just to finish but I'm afraid it's gonna stop yeah right right

Unknown Speaker  3:50:18  
yeah I don't know about us I don't know it might have a star that either and you know having to do our first second just to finish and started again but I didn't have it or not yeah

Unknown Speaker  3:50:30  
right

Unknown Speaker  3:50:32  
on the last two years during an amazing Congress

Unknown Speaker  3:50:38  
I'm actually surprised but we have to Chris

Unknown Speaker  3:50:42  
Yeah this don't seem like they're they're dumped on play I kind of banter

Unknown Speaker  3:50:47  
I think it's fine they they know that they're yeah okay

Unknown Speaker  3:50:54  
good fix it so just

Unknown Speaker  3:51:02  
Sorry but couldn't properly

Unknown Speaker  3:51:06  
number two, I'm really thinking of it from the standpoint of people who have been traumatized and five minutes that means the same thing to me.

Unknown Speaker  3:51:18  
And I'm also thinking about people trying to have felony record thing now, how often were set up forcing them to go right back to the same place. Are they

Unknown Speaker  3:51:34  
going to do now have surprisingly hard to find where? livable and that you can get a new start with like that?

Unknown Speaker  3:51:44  
Where is the camera

Unknown Speaker  3:51:47  
looks like it's over here. So this Yeah, if you're trying to cover it, it's covered but I need to like

Unknown Speaker  3:52:18  
Emily don't want to be

Unknown Speaker  3:52:29  
where the where is the cover? Because all of us

Unknown Speaker  3:52:41  
she's

Unknown Speaker  3:52:42  
still here.

Unknown Speaker  3:52:44  
Yeah and just like like everyone else does.

Unknown Speaker  3:53:06  
I said we learn each other's losses

Unknown Speaker  3:53:19  
make

Unknown Speaker  3:53:26  
sense just how you

Unknown Speaker  3:53:31  
have it you can like my goodness

Unknown Speaker  3:53:38  
Yeah.

Unknown Speaker  3:53:40  
Be back to the hotel and also some

Unknown Speaker  3:53:46  
absolutely does not show him

Unknown Speaker  3:53:51  
like instant

Unknown Speaker  3:53:56  
okay

Unknown Speaker  3:54:12  
Journey came out of nowhere

Unknown Speaker  3:54:19  
talking about

Unknown Speaker  3:54:25  
so

Unknown Speaker  3:54:37  
try not to, we're speaking from No, absolutely not. I don't know she was here and then.

Unknown Speaker  3:54:48  
I don't know.

Unknown Speaker  3:54:51  
So we're pretty much good okay.

Unknown Speaker  3:55:01  
And

Unknown Speaker  3:55:03  
never say never to us over

Unknown Speaker  3:55:08  
here. Here we go.

Unknown Speaker  3:55:10  
Might be a first time in a decade.

Unknown Speaker  3:55:28  
I'm just wondering since

Unknown Speaker  3:55:35  
I haven't been

Unknown Speaker  3:55:42  
Yeah, I think it's basically

Unknown Speaker  3:55:46  
like when I get up there and I did tonight

Unknown Speaker  3:55:50  
I answer everybody's

Unknown Speaker  3:55:55  
questions.

Unknown Speaker  3:55:59  
I can see

Unknown Speaker  3:56:00  
Like institutions

Unknown Speaker  3:56:19  
like me,

Unknown Speaker  3:56:49  
I so everyone can kind of filter and we're going to get started.

Unknown Speaker  3:56:55  
Now we've got some lunch over there anyone who likes to grab one

Unknown Speaker  3:57:00  
are now so they are just forever

Unknown Speaker  3:57:48  
I don't know.

Unknown Speaker  3:57:52  
Like champions on stage receive

Unknown Speaker  3:58:15  
There's currently a petition for recreational legalization.

Transcribed by https://otter.ai
